
~~~~~~~~~~~
#@#@#Beyonce#@#@#
Beyonce Giselle Knowles-Carter ( born September 4, 1981) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. 
Born and raised in Houston, Texas, Beyonce performed in various singing and dancing competitions as a child. 
Beyonce rose to fame in the late 1990s as the lead singer of Destiny's Child, one of the best-selling girl groups in history. 
During their hiatus, Beyonce made her theatrical film debut with a role in the US box-office number-one Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002) and recorded her first solo album, Dangerously in Love (2003), which debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart. 
Following the disbandment of Destiny's Child in 2006, Beyonce released her second solo album, B'Day, which contained the US number-one single "Irreplaceable" as well as the UK number-one singles "Déjà Vu" and "Beautiful Liar". 
Beyonce continued her acting career with starring roles in The Pink Panther (2006), Dreamgirls (2006), and Obsessed (2009). Beyonce’s marriage to rapper Jay-Z and her portrayal of Etta James in Cadillac Records (2008) influenced her third album, I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008), which earned a record-setting six Grammy Awards in 2010. 
After splitting from her manager and father Mathew Knowles in 2010, Beyonce released 4 (2011), which was influenced by 1970s funk, 1980s pop, and 1990s soul. 
Beyonce received widespread critical acclaim for her albums, Beyonce (2013) and Lemonade (2016). 
Beyonce became the first and only music act in the Billboard 200 chart history to debut at number one with their first six solo studio albums. 
In 2018, Beyonce released Everything Is Love, a collaborative album with her husband, Jay-Z, as the Carters.
Beyonce is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, having sold over 100 million records worldwide as a solo artist and a further 60 million records with Destiny's Child. 
Beyonce’s success during the 2000s was recognized with the Recording Industry Association of America's Top Certified Artist of the Decade as well as Billboard magazine's Top Radio Songs Artist and the Top Female Artist of the Decade. 
Beyonce is the most nominated woman in the Grammy Award history with a total of 23 wins. 
Beyonce is also the most awarded artist at the MTV Video Music Awards, with 24 wins, including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. 
In 2014, Beyonce became the highest-paid black musician in history and was listed among Time's 100 most influential people in the world for a second year in a row. 
Forbes ranked Beyonce as the most powerful female in entertainment on their 2015 and 2017 lists, and in 2016, Beyonce occupied the sixth place for Time's Person of the Year.
When Beyonce was eight, she and childhood friend Kelly Rowland met LaTavia Roberson while at an audition for an all-girl entertainment group. 
After seeing the group, R&B producer Arne Frager brought them to his Northern California studio and placed them in Star Search, the largest talent show on national TV at the time. 
Girl's Tyme failed to win, and Beyonce later said the song they performed was not good. 
In 1995 Beyonce's father resigned from his job to manage the group. 
The move reduced Beyonce's family's income by half, and her parents were forced to move into separated apartments. 
Mathew cut the original line-up to four and the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R&B girl groups. 
Beyonce's parents separated. 
Beyonce’s group changed their name to Destiny's Child in 1996, based upon a passage in the Book of Isaiah. 
In 1997, Destiny's Child released their major label debut song "Killing Time" on the soundtrack to the 1997 film, Men in Black. 
The following year, Beyonce’s group released their self-titled debut album, scoring their first major hit "No, No, No". 
The album established Beyonce’s group as a viable act in the music industry, with moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards for Best R&B/Soul Album of the Year, Best R&B/Soul or Rap New Artist, and Best R&B/Soul Single for "No, No, No". 
The group released their Multi-Platinum second album The Writing's on the Wall in 1999. 
The record features some of the group's most widely known songs such as "Bills, Bills, Bills", the group's first number-one single, "Jumpin' Jumpin'" and "Say My Name", which became their most successful song at the time, and would remain one of their signature songs. 
"Say My Name" won the Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and the Best R&B Song at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards. 
The Writing's on the Wall sold more than eight million copies worldwide. 
During this time, Beyonce recorded a duet with Marc Nelson, an original member of Boyz II Men, on the song "After All Is Said and Done" for the soundtrack to the 1999 film, The Best Man.
LeToya Luckett and Roberson became unhappy with Mathew's managing of the band and eventually were replaced by Farrah Franklin and Michelle Williams. 
Beyonce experienced depression following the split with Luckett and Roberson after being publicly blamed by the media, critics, and blogs for its cause. 
Beyonce’s long-standing boyfriend left her at this time. 
The depression was so severe it lasted for a couple of years, during which Beyonce occasionally kept herself in her bedroom for days and refused to eat anything. 
Beyonce stated that she struggled to speak about her depression because Destiny's Child had just won their first Grammy Award, and Beyonce feared no one would take her seriously. 
Beyonce would later speak of her mother as the person who helped her fight it. 
Franklin was then dismissed, leaving just Beyonce, Rowland, and Williams.
The remaining band members recorded "Independent Women Part I", which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film Charlie's Angels. 
It became their best-charting single, topping the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart for eleven consecutive weeks. 
In early 2001, while Destiny's Child was completing their third album, Beyonce landed a major role in the MTV made-for-television film, Carmen: A Hip Hopera, starring alongside American actor Mekhi Phifer. 
When the third album Survivor was released in May 2001, Luckett and Roberson filed a lawsuit claiming that the songs were aimed at them. 
After releasing their holiday album 8 Days of Christmas in October 2001, Beyonce’s group announced a hiatus to further pursue solo careers.
According to Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli, Beyonce uses different fashion styles to work with her music while performing. 
Beyonce’s mother co-wrote a book, published in 2002, titled Destiny's Style an account of how fashion affected the trio's success. 
The B'Day Anthology Video Album showed many instances of fashion-oriented footage, depicting classic to contemporary wardrobe styles. 
In 2007, Beyonce was featured on the cover of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, becoming the second African American woman after Tyra Banks, and People magazine recognized Beyonce as the best-dressed celebrity.
The Beyhive is the name given to Beyonce's fan base. 
Fans were previously titled "The Beyontourage", (a portmanteau of Beyonce and entourage). 
The name Bey Hive derives from the word beehive, purposely misspelled to resemble Beyonce’s first name, and was penned by fans after petitions on Twitter and online news reports during competitions.
In 2006, the animal rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), criticized Beyonce for wearing and using fur in her clothing line House of Deréon. 
In 2011, Beyonce appeared on the cover of French fashion magazine L'Officiel, in blackface and tribal makeup that drew criticism from the media. 
A statement released from a spokesperson for the magazine said that Beyonce's look was "far from the glamorous Sasha Fierce" and that it was "a return to her African roots".
Beyonce's lighter skin color and costuming has drawn criticism from some in the African-American community. 
Emmett Price, a professor of music at Northeastern University, wrote in 2007, that he thinks race plays a role in many of these criticisms, saying white celebrities who dress similarly do not attract as many comments. 
Beyonce criticized H&M for their proposed "retouching" of promotional images of her, and according to Vogue requested that only "natural pictures be used".

This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Page semi-protected
Beyoncé
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about the singer. For her self-titled album, see Beyoncé (album).
Beyoncé
Picture of Beyoncé
Beyoncé performing at Wembley Stadium, London during The Formation World Tour, 2016
Born	Beyoncé Giselle Knowles

September 4, 1981 (age 38)
Houston, Texas, U.S.
Residence	Bel Air, California, U.S.
Other names	

    BThird Ward Trill

Occupation	

    Singer actress songwriter record producer director model dancer fashion designer businesswoman

Years active	1997–present
Organization	Ivy Park
Parkwood Entertainment
Net worth	US$470 million (2019)
Spouse(s)	Jay-Z (m. 2008)
Children	3
Parent(s)	

    Mathew Knowles
    Tina Knowles

Relatives	Solange Knowles (sister)
Awards	Full list
Musical career
Genres	

    R&B pop hip hop

Instruments	Vocals
Labels	

    Music World Parkwood Columbia

Associated acts	

    Destiny's Child Jay-Z The Carters Blue Ivy Carter

Website	beyonce.com

Beyoncé Giselle Knowles-Carter (/biːˈjɒnseɪ/ bee-YON-say; born September 4, 1981) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. Born and raised in Houston, Texas, Beyoncé performed in various singing and dancing competitions as a child. She rose to fame in the late 1990s as the lead singer of Destiny's Child, one of the best-selling girl groups in history. During their hiatus, she made her theatrical film debut with a role in the US box-office number-one Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002) and recorded her first solo album, Dangerously in Love (2003), which debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart. It also featured the US Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles "Crazy in Love" and "Baby Boy".

Following the disbandment of Destiny's Child in 2006, she released her second solo album, B'Day, which contained the US number-one single "Irreplaceable" as well as the UK number-one singles "Déjà Vu" and "Beautiful Liar". Beyoncé continued her acting career with starring roles in The Pink Panther (2006), Dreamgirls (2006), and Obsessed (2009). Her marriage to rapper Jay-Z and her portrayal of Etta James in Cadillac Records (2008) influenced her third album, I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008), which earned a record-setting six Grammy Awards in 2010. It spawned the UK number-one single "If I Were a Boy" and the US number-one single "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)". After splitting from her manager and father Mathew Knowles in 2010, she released 4 (2011), which was influenced by 1970s funk, 1980s pop, and 1990s soul. Beyoncé received widespread critical acclaim for her albums, Beyoncé (2013) and Lemonade (2016); the latter became the world's best-selling album of 2016. She became the first and only music act in the Billboard 200 chart history to debut at number one with their first six solo studio albums. In 2018, she released Everything Is Love, a collaborative album with her husband, Jay-Z, as the Carters.

Beyoncé is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, having sold over 100 million records worldwide as a solo artist and a further 60 million records with Destiny's Child. Her success during the 2000s was recognized with the Recording Industry Association of America's Top Certified Artist of the Decade as well as Billboard magazine's Top Radio Songs Artist and the Top Female Artist of the Decade. Beyoncé is the most nominated woman in the Grammy Award history with a total of 23 wins. She is also the most awarded artist at the MTV Video Music Awards, with 24 wins, including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. In 2014, she became the highest-paid black musician in history and was listed among Time's 100 most influential people in the world for a second year in a row. Forbes ranked her as the most powerful female in entertainment on their 2015 and 2017 lists, and in 2016, she occupied the sixth place for Time's Person of the Year.


Beyoncé Giselle Knowles was born in Houston, Texas, to Celestine "Tina" Knowles (née Beyincé), a hairdresser and salon owner, and Mathew Knowles, a Xerox sales manager. Beyoncé's name is a tribute to her mother's maiden name. Beyoncé's younger sister Solange is also a singer and a former backup dancer for Destiny's Child. Solange and Beyoncé are the first sisters to have both had No. 1 albums. Mathew is African American, and Tina is of Louisiana Creole descent (African, Native American, and French). Through her mother, Beyoncé is a descendant of Acadian leader Joseph Broussard. Beyoncé attended St. Mary's Montessori School in Houston, where she enrolled in dance classes. Her singing talent was discovered when dance instructor Darlette Johnson began humming a song and she finished it, able to hit the high-pitched notes. Beyoncé's interest in music and performing continued after winning a school talent show at age seven, singing John Lennon's "Imagine" to beat 15/16-year-olds. In fall of 1990, Beyoncé enrolled in Parker Elementary School, a music magnet school in Houston, where she would perform with the school's choir. She also attended the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts and later Alief Elsik High School. Beyoncé was also a member of the choir at St. John's United Methodist Church as a soloist for two years.

When Beyoncé was eight, she and childhood friend Kelly Rowland met LaTavia Roberson while at an audition for an all-girl entertainment group. They were placed into a group called Girl's Tyme with three other girls, and rapped and danced on the talent show circuit in Houston. After seeing the group, R&B producer Arne Frager brought them to his Northern California studio and placed them in Star Search, the largest talent show on national TV at the time. Girl's Tyme failed to win, and Beyoncé later said the song they performed was not good. In 1995 Beyoncé's father resigned from his job to manage the group. The move reduced Beyoncé's family's income by half, and her parents were forced to move into separated apartments. Mathew cut the original line-up to four and the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R&B girl groups. The girls auditioned before record labels and were finally signed to Elektra Records, moving to Atlanta Records briefly to work on their first recording, only to be cut by the company. This put further strain on the family, and Beyoncé's parents separated. On October 5, 1995, Dwayne Wiggins's Grass Roots Entertainment signed the group. In 1996, the girls began recording their debut album under an agreement with Sony Music, the Knowles family reunited, and shortly after, the group got a contract with Columbia Records.
1997–2002: Destiny's Child
Main article: Destiny's Child

The group changed their name to Destiny's Child in 1996, based upon a passage in the Book of Isaiah. In 1997, Destiny's Child released their major label debut song "Killing Time" on the soundtrack to the 1997 film, Men in Black. The following year, the group released their self-titled debut album, scoring their first major hit "No, No, No". The album established the group as a viable act in the music industry, with moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards for Best R&B/Soul Album of the Year, Best R&B/Soul or Rap New Artist, and Best R&B/Soul Single for "No, No, No". The group released their Multi-Platinum second album The Writing's on the Wall in 1999. The record features some of the group's most widely known songs such as "Bills, Bills, Bills", the group's first number-one single, "Jumpin' Jumpin'" and "Say My Name", which became their most successful song at the time, and would remain one of their signature songs. "Say My Name" won the Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and the Best R&B Song at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards. The Writing's on the Wall sold more than eight million copies worldwide. During this time, Beyoncé recorded a duet with Marc Nelson, an original member of Boyz II Men, on the song "After All Is Said and Done" for the soundtrack to the 1999 film, The Best Man.

LeToya Luckett and Roberson became unhappy with Mathew's managing of the band and eventually were replaced by Farrah Franklin and Michelle Williams. Beyoncé experienced depression following the split with Luckett and Roberson after being publicly blamed by the media, critics, and blogs for its cause. Her long-standing boyfriend left her at this time. The depression was so severe it lasted for a couple of years, during which she occasionally kept herself in her bedroom for days and refused to eat anything. Beyoncé stated that she struggled to speak about her depression because Destiny's Child had just won their first Grammy Award, and she feared no one would take her seriously. Beyoncé would later speak of her mother as the person who helped her fight it. Franklin was then dismissed, leaving just Beyoncé, Rowland, and Williams.

The remaining band members recorded "Independent Women Part I", which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film Charlie's Angels. It became their best-charting single, topping the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart for eleven consecutive weeks. In early 2001, while Destiny's Child was completing their third album, Beyoncé landed a major role in the MTV made-for-television film, Carmen: A Hip Hopera, starring alongside American actor Mekhi Phifer. Set in Philadelphia, the film is a modern interpretation of the 19th-century opera Carmen by French composer Georges Bizet. When the third album Survivor was released in May 2001, Luckett and Roberson filed a lawsuit claiming that the songs were aimed at them. The album debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 663,000 copies sold. The album spawned other number-one hits, "Bootylicious" and the title track, "Survivor", the latter of which earned the group a Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals. After releasing their holiday album 8 Days of Christmas in October 2001, the group announced a hiatus to further pursue solo careers.

In July 2002, Beyoncé made her theatrical film debut, playing Foxxy Cleopatra alongside Mike Myers in the comedy film Austin Powers in Goldmember, which spent its first weekend atop the US box office and grossed $73 million. Beyoncé released "Work It Out" as the lead single from its soundtrack album which entered the top ten in the UK, Norway, and Belgium. In 2003, Beyoncé starred opposite Cuba Gooding, Jr., in the musical comedy The Fighting Temptations as Lilly, a single mother with whom Gooding's character falls in love. The film received mixed reviews from critics but grossed $30 million in the U.S. Beyoncé released "Fighting Temptation" as the lead single from the film's soundtrack album, with Missy Elliott, MC Lyte, and Free which was also used to promote the film. Another of Beyoncé's contributions to the soundtrack, "Summertime", fared better on the US charts.
2003–2005: Dangerously in Love and Destiny Fulfilled
A woman, flanked by two male dancers, holds a microphone in one hand as she dances
Beyoncé performing "Baby Boy", which spent nine consecutive weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart

Beyoncé's first solo recording was a feature on Jay-Z's "'03 Bonnie & Clyde" that was released in October 2002, peaking at number four on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart. Her first solo album Dangerously in Love was released on June 24, 2003, after Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland had released their solo efforts. The album sold 317,000 copies in its first week, debuted atop the Billboard 200, and has since sold 11 million copies worldwide. The album's lead single, "Crazy in Love", featuring Jay-Z, became Beyoncé's first number-one single as a solo artist in the US. The single "Baby Boy" also reached number one, and singles, "Me, Myself and I" and "Naughty Girl", both reached the top-five. The album earned Beyoncé a then record-tying five awards at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards; Best Contemporary R&B Album, Best Female R&B Vocal Performance for "Dangerously in Love 2", Best R&B Song and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "Crazy in Love", and Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for "The Closer I Get to You" with Luther Vandross. During the ceremony, she performed with Prince.

In November 2003, she embarked on the Dangerously in Love Tour in Europe and later toured alongside Missy Elliott and Alicia Keys for the Verizon Ladies First Tour in North America. On February 1, 2004, Beyoncé performed the American national anthem at Super Bowl XXXVIII, at the Reliant Stadium in Houston, Texas. After the release of Dangerously in Love, Beyoncé had planned to produce a follow-up album using several of the left-over tracks. However, this was put on hold so she could concentrate on recording Destiny Fulfilled, the final studio album by Destiny's Child. Released on November 15, 2004, in the US and peaking at number two on the Billboard 200, Destiny Fulfilled included the singles "Lose My Breath" and "Soldier", which reached the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Destiny's Child embarked on a worldwide concert tour, Destiny Fulfilled... and Lovin' It sponsored by McDonald's Corporation, and performed hits such as "No, No, No", "Survivor", "Say My Name", "Independent Women" and "Lose My Breath". In addition to renditions of the group's recorded material, they also performed songs from each singer's solo careers, most notably numbers from Dangerously in Love. and during the last stop of their European tour, in Barcelona on June 11, 2005, Rowland announced that Destiny's Child would disband following the North American leg of the tour. The group released their first compilation album Number 1's on October 25, 2005, in the US and accepted a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in March 2006. The group has sold 60 million records worldwide.
2006–2007: B'Day
A woman stands with a microphone
Beyoncé performing during The Beyoncé Experience tour (2007)

Beyoncé's second solo album B'Day was released on September 4, 2006, in the US, to coincide with her twenty-fifth birthday. It sold 541,000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the Billboard 200, becoming Beyoncé's second consecutive number-one album in the United States. The album's lead single "Déjà Vu", featuring Jay-Z, reached the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. The second international single "Irreplaceable" was a commercial success worldwide, reaching number one in Australia, Hungary, Ireland, New Zealand and the United States. B'Day also produced three other singles; "Ring the Alarm", "Get Me Bodied", and "Green Light" (released in the United Kingdom only).

At the 49th Annual Grammy Awards (2007), B'Day was nominated for five Grammy Awards, including Best Contemporary R&B Album, Best Female R&B Vocal Performance for "Ring the Alarm" and Best R&B Song and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration"for "Déjà Vu"; the Freemasons club mix of "Déjà Vu" without the rap was put forward in the Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical category. B'Day won the award for Best Contemporary R&B Album. The following year, B'Day received two nominations – for Record of the Year for "Irreplaceable" and Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for "Beautiful Liar" (with Shakira), also receiving a nomination for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for Motion Pictures, Television or Other Visual Media for her appearance on Dreamgirls: Music from the Motion Picture (2006).

Her first acting role of 2006 was in the comedy film The Pink Panther starring opposite Steve Martin, grossing $158.8 million at the box office worldwide. Her second film Dreamgirls, the film version of the 1981 Broadway musical loosely based on The Supremes, received acclaim from critics and grossed $154 million internationally. In it, she starred opposite Jennifer Hudson, Jamie Foxx, and Eddie Murphy playing a pop singer based on Diana Ross. To promote the film, Beyoncé released "Listen" as the lead single from the soundtrack album. In April 2007, Beyoncé embarked on The Beyoncé Experience, her first worldwide concert tour, visiting 97 venues and grossed over $24 million.[note 1] Beyoncé conducted pre-concert food donation drives during six major stops in conjunction with her pastor at St. John's and America's Second Harvest. At the same time, B'Day was re-released with five additional songs, including her duet with Shakira "Beautiful Liar".
2008–2010: I Am... Sasha Fierce and marriage
A woman stands looking out to a crowd
Beyoncé performing "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" during the I Am... World Tour. The song reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100, earned the Grammy Award for Song of the Year and spawned the Internet's first major dance craze.

On April 4, 2008, Beyoncé married Jay-Z. She publicly revealed their marriage in a video montage at the listening party for her third studio album, I Am... Sasha Fierce, in Manhattan's Sony Club on October 22, 2008. I Am... Sasha Fierce was released on November 18, 2008, in the United States. The album formally introduces Beyoncé's alter ego Sasha Fierce, conceived during the making of her 2003 single "Crazy in Love". It was met with generally mediocre reviews from critics, but sold 482,000 copies in its first week, debuting atop the Billboard 200, and giving Beyoncé her third consecutive number-one album in the US. The album featured the number-one song "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" and the top-five songs "If I Were a Boy" and "Halo". Achieving the accomplishment of becoming her longest-running Hot 100 single in her career, "Halo"'s success in the US helped Beyoncé attain more top-ten singles on the list than any other woman during the 2000s. It also included the successful "Sweet Dreams", and singles "Diva", "Ego", "Broken-Hearted Girl" and "Video Phone". The music video for "Single Ladies" has been parodied and imitated around the world, spawning the "first major dance craze" of the Internet age according to the Toronto Star. The video has won several awards, including Best Video at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards, the 2009 Scottish MOBO Awards, and the 2009 BET Awards. At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, the video was nominated for nine awards, ultimately winning three including Video of the Year. Its failure to win the Best Female Video category, which went to American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift's "You Belong with Me", led to Kanye West interrupting the ceremony and Beyoncé improvising a re-presentation of Swift's award during her own acceptance speech. In March 2009, Beyoncé embarked on the I Am... World Tour, her second headlining worldwide concert tour, consisting of 108 shows, grossing $119.5 million.

Beyoncé further expanded her acting career, starring as blues singer Etta James in the 2008 musical biopic Cadillac Records. Her performance in the film received praise from critics, and she garnered several nominations for her portrayal of James, including a Satellite Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress, and a NAACP Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress. Beyoncé donated her entire salary from the film to Phoenix House, an organization of rehabilitation centers for heroin addicts around the country. On January 20, 2009, Beyoncé performed James' "At Last" at First Couple Barack and Michelle Obama's first inaugural ball. Beyoncé starred opposite Ali Larter and Idris Elba in the thriller, Obsessed. She played Sharon Charles, a mother and wife whose family is threatened by her husband's stalker. Although the film received negative reviews from critics, the movie did well at the US box office, grossing $68 million—$60 million more than Cadillac Records—on a budget of $20 million. The fight scene finale between Sharon and the character played by Ali Larter also won the 2010 MTV Movie Award for Best Fight.

At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, Beyoncé received ten nominations, including Album of the Year for I Am ... Sasha Fierce, Record of the Year for "Halo", and Song of the Year for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", among others. She tied with Lauryn Hill for most Grammy nominations in a single year by a female artist. Beyoncé went on to win six of those nominations, breaking a record she previously tied in 2004 for the most Grammy awards won in a single night by a female artist with six. In 2010, Beyoncé was featured on Lady Gaga's single "Telephone" and appeared in its music video. The song topped the US Pop Songs chart, becoming the sixth number-one for both Beyoncé and Gaga, tying them with Mariah Carey for most number-ones since the Nielsen Top 40 airplay chart launched in 1992. "Telephone" received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals.

Beyoncé announced a hiatus from her music career in January 2010, heeding her mother's advice, "to live life, to be inspired by things again". During the break she and her father parted ways as business partners. Beyoncé's musical break lasted nine months and saw her visit multiple European cities, the Great Wall of China, the Egyptian pyramids, Australia, English music festivals and various museums and ballet performances.
2011–2013: 4 and motherhood
The upper body of a woman is shown as she sings into a microphone
Beyoncé's sound became mellower with 2011's 4 which focused on traditional R&B styles. She performed the album during her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé concert residency in August 2011

On June 26, 2011, she became the first solo female artist to headline the main Pyramid stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival in over twenty years. Her fourth studio album 4 was released two days later in the US. 4 sold 310,000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart, giving Beyoncé her fourth consecutive number-one album in the US. The album was preceded by two of its singles "Run the World (Girls)" and "Best Thing I Never Had". The fourth single "Love on Top" spent seven consecutive weeks at number one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, while peaking at number 20 on the Billboard Hot 100, the highest peak from the album. 4 also produced four other singles; "Party", "Countdown", "I Care" and "End of Time". "Eat, Play, Love", a cover story written by Beyoncé for Essence that detailed her 2010 career break, won her a writing award from the New York Association of Black Journalists. In late 2011, she took the stage at New York's Roseland Ballroom for four nights of special performances: the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé concerts saw the performance of her 4 album to a standing room only. On August 1, 2011, the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), having shipped 1 million copies to retail stores. By December 2015, it reached sales of 1.5 million copies in the US. The album reached one billion Spotify streams on February 5, 2018, making Beyoncé the first female artist to have three of their albums surpass one billion streams on the platform.

On January 7, 2012, Beyoncé gave birth to her first child, a daughter, Blue Ivy Carter, at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York. Five months later, she performed for four nights at Revel Atlantic City's Ovation Hall to celebrate the resort's opening, her first performances since giving birth to Blue Ivy.

In January 2013, Destiny's Child released Love Songs, a compilation album of the romance-themed songs from their previous albums and a newly recorded track, "Nuclear". Beyoncé performed the American national anthem singing along with a pre-recorded track at President Obama's second inauguration in Washington, D.C. The following month, Beyoncé performed at the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show, held at the Mercedes-Benz Superdome in New Orleans. The performance stands as the second most tweeted about moment in history at 268,000 tweets per minute. At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards, Beyoncé won for Best Traditional R&B Performance for "Love on Top". Her feature-length documentary film, Life Is But a Dream, first aired on HBO on February 16, 2013. The film was co-directed by Beyoncé herself.
2013–2015: Beyoncé
Beyoncé performing during The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour in 2013. The tour is one of the highest grossing tours of the decade.

Beyoncé embarked on The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour on April 15 in Belgrade, Serbia; the tour included 132 dates that ran through to March 2014. It became the most successful tour of her career and one of the most successful tours of all time. In May, Beyoncé's cover of Amy Winehouse's "Back to Black" with André 3000 on The Great Gatsby soundtrack was released. Beyoncé voiced Queen Tara in the 3D CGI animated film, Epic, released by 20th Century Fox on May 24, and recorded an original song for the film, "Rise Up", co-written with Sia.

On December 13, 2013, Beyoncé unexpectedly released her eponymous fifth studio album on the iTunes Store without any prior announcement or promotion. The album debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart, giving Beyoncé her fifth consecutive number-one album in the US. This made her the first woman in the chart's history to have her first five studio albums debut at number one. Beyoncé received critical acclaim and commercial success, selling one million digital copies worldwide in six days; Musically an electro-R&B album, it concerns darker themes previously unexplored in her work, such as "bulimia, postnatal depression [and] the fears and insecurities of marriage and motherhood". The single "Drunk in Love", featuring Jay-Z, peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.

In April 2014, after much speculation, Beyoncé and Jay-Z officially announced their On the Run Tour. It served as the couple's first co-headlining stadium tour together. On August 24, 2014, she received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards. Beyoncé also won home three competitive awards: Best Video with a Social Message and Best Cinematography for "Pretty Hurts", as well as best collaboration for "Drunk in Love". In November, Forbes reported that Beyoncé was the top-earning woman in music for the second year in a row—earning $115 million in the year, more than double her earnings in 2013. Beyoncé was reissued with new material in three forms: as an extended play, a box set, as well as a full platinum edition. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), in the last 19 days of 2013, the album sold 2.3 million units worldwide, becoming the tenth best-selling album of 2013. The album also went on to become the twentieth best-selling album of 2014. As of November 2014, Beyoncé has sold over 5 million copies worldwide and has generated over 1 billion streams, as of March 2015.

At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015, Beyoncé was nominated for six awards, ultimately winning three: Best R&B Performance and Best R&B Song for "Drunk in Love", and Best Surround Sound Album for Beyoncé. She was nominated for Album of the Year, but the award went to Beck for his album Morning Phase.
2016–2017: Lemonade and collaborations
Beyoncé performing alongside Bruno Mars at Super Bowl 50 halftime show in February 2016

On February 6, 2016, Beyoncé released "Formation" and its accompanying music video exclusively on the music streaming platform Tidal; the song was made available to download for free. She performed "Formation" live for the first time during the NFL Super Bowl 50 halftime show. The appearance was considered controversial as it appeared to reference the 50th anniversary of the Black Panther Party and the NFL forbids political statements in its performances. Immediately following the performance, Beyoncé announced The Formation World Tour, which highlighted stops in both North America, and Europe. It ended on October 7, with Beyoncé bringing out her husband Jay-Z, Kendrick Lamar, and Serena Williams for the last show. The tour went on to win Tour of the Year at the 44th American Music Awards.

On April 16, 2016, Beyoncé released a teaser clip for a project called Lemonade. It turned out to be a one-hour film which aired on HBO exactly a week later; a corresponding album with the same title was released on the same day exclusively on Tidal. Lemonade debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, making Beyoncé the first act in Billboard history to have their first six studio albums debut atop the chart; she broke a record previously tied with DMX in 2013. With all 12 tracks of Lemonade debuting on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, Beyoncé also became the first female act to chart 12 or more songs at the same time. Additionally, Lemonade was streamed 115 million times through Tidal, setting a record for the most-streamed album in a single week by a female artist in history. It was 2016's third highest-selling album in the US with 1.554 million copies sold in that time period within the country as well as the best-selling album worldwide with global sales of 2.5 million throughout the year. In June 2019, Lemonade was certified 3× Platinum, having sold up to 3 million album-equivalent units in the United States alone.
Beyoncé performing during The Formation World Tour in 2016. The tour grossed $256 million from 49 sold-out shows.

Lemonade became her most critically acclaimed work to date, receiving universal acclaim according to Metacritic, a website collecting reviews from professional music critics. Several music publications included the album among the best of 2016, including Rolling Stone, which listed Lemonade at number one. The album's visuals were nominated in 11 categories at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards, the most ever received by Beyoncé in a single year, and went on to win 8 awards, including Video of the Year for "Formation". The eight wins made Beyoncé the most awarded artist in the history of the VMAs (24), surpassing Madonna (20). Beyoncé occupied the sixth place for Time magazine's 2016 Person of the Year.

In January 2017, it was announced that Beyoncé would headline the Coachella Music and Arts Festival. This would make Beyoncé only the second female headliner of the festival since it was founded in 1999. It was later announced on February 23, 2017 that Beyoncé would no longer be able to perform at the festival due to doctor's concerns regarding her pregnancy. The festival owners announced that she will instead headline the 2018 festival. Upon the announcement of Beyoncé's departure from the festival lineup, ticket prices dropped by 12%.

At the 59th Grammy Awards in February 2017, Lemonade led the nominations with nine, including Album, Record, and Song of the Year for Lemonade and "Formation" respectively. and ultimately won two, Best Urban Contemporary Album for Lemonade and Best Music Video for "Formation". Adele, upon winning her Grammy for Album of the Year, stated Lemonade was monumental and more deserving.

On June 13, 2017, Beyoncé gave birth to twins Rumi and Sir Carter at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles, California. In September 2017, Beyoncé collaborated with J Balvin and Willy William, to release a remix of the song "Mi Gente". Beyoncé donated all proceeds from the song to hurricane charities for those affected by Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in Texas, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and other Caribbean Islands.

On November 10, Eminem released "Walk on Water" featuring Beyoncé as the lead single from his album Revival. On November 30, Ed Sheeran announced that Beyoncé would feature on the remix to his song "Perfect". "Perfect Duet" was released on December 1, 2017. The song reached number-one in the United States, becoming Beyoncé's sixth song of her solo career to do so.
2018–present: Everything Is Love, Homecoming, and The Lion King

On January 4, 2018, the music video of Beyoncé and Jay-Z's 4:44 collaboration, "Family Feud" was released. It was directed by Ava DuVernay. On March 1, 2018, DJ Khaled released "Top Off" as the first single from his forthcoming album Father of Asahd featuring Beyoncé, husband Jay-Z, and Future. On March 5, 2018, a joint tour with Knowles' husband Jay-Z, was leaked on Facebook. Information about the tour was later taken down. The couple announced the joint tour officially as On the Run II Tour on March 12 and simultaneously released a trailer for the tour on YouTube. On March 20, 2018, the couple traveled to Jamaica to film a music video directed by Melina Matsoukas.

On April 14, 2018, Beyoncé played the first of two weekends as the headlining act of the Coachella Music Festival. Her performance of April 14, attended by 125,000 festival-goers, was immediately praised, with multiple media outlets describing it as historic. The performance became the most-tweeted about performance of weekend one, as well as the most-watched live Coachella performance and the most-watched live performance on YouTube of all time. The show paid tribute to black culture, specifically historically black colleges and universities and featured a live band with over 100 dancers. Destiny's Child also reunited during the show.
Album release at the final London performance of On the Run II Tour

On June 6, 2018, Beyoncé and husband Jay-Z kicked-off the On the Run II Tour in Cardiff, United Kingdom. Ten days later, at their final London performance, the pair unveiled Everything Is Love, their joint studio album, credited under the name The Carters, and initially available exclusively on Tidal. The pair also released the video for the album's lead single, "Apeshit", on Beyoncé's official YouTube channel. Everything Is Love received generally positive reviews, and debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200, with 123,000 album-equivalent units, of which 70,000 were pure album sales.

On December 2, 2018, Beyoncé alongside Jay-Z headlined the Global Citizen Festival: Mandela 100 which was held at FNB Stadium in Johannesburg, South Africa. Their 2-hour performance had concepts similar to the On the Run II Tour and Beyoncé was praised for her outfits, which paid tribute to Africa's diversity.

On April 17, 2019, Beyoncé alongside media-service provider Netflix, premiered the 137-minute documentary and concert film Homecoming, mainly regarding Beyoncé's historic 2018 Coachella performances. The film was accompanied by the live album Homecoming: The Live Album. It was later reported that Beyoncé and Netflix had signed a $60 million deal to produce three different projects, one of which is Homecoming. Homecoming received six nominations at the 71st Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards.

Beyoncé starred in the voice over role of Nala in the remake The Lion King, which was released on July 19, 2019. In March 2017, director Jon Favreau stated that Beyoncé was his top choice for the role, and that the studio and himself would be willing to do whatever it took to accommodate her busy schedule. On November 1, 2017, her role was confirmed in an official announcement. Beyoncé is featured on the film's soundtrack, released on July 11, 2019, with a remake of the song "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" alongside Donald Glover, Billy Eichner and Seth Rogen, which was originally composed by Elton John. Additionally, an original song from the film by Beyoncé, "Spirit", was released as the lead single from both the soundtrack and The Lion King: The Gift – an album released alongside the film, produced and curated by Beyoncé. Beyoncé called The Lion King: The Gift a "sonic cinema." She also stated that the album is influenced by everything from R&B, pop, hip hop and Afro Beat. The songs were additionally produced by African producers, which Beyoncé said was because "authenticity and heart were important to [her]," since the film is set in Africa.
Artistry
Voice and songwriting
With "Single Ladies", clearly I'd just gotten married, and people want to get married every day—then there was the whole Justin Timberlake thing [recreating the video] on Saturday Night Live, and it was also the year YouTube blew up. With "Irreplaceable", the aggressive lyrics, the acoustic guitar, and the 808 drum machine—those things don't typically go together, and it sounded fresh. "Crazy in Love" was another one of those classic moments in pop culture that none of us expected. I asked Jay to get on the song the night before I had to turn my album in – thank God he did. It still never gets old, no matter how many times I sing it.

—Beyoncé

Jody Rosen highlights her tone and timbre as particularly distinctive, describing her voice as "one of the most compelling instruments in popular music". Her vocal abilities mean she is identified as the centerpiece of Destiny's Child. Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that her voice is "velvety yet tart, with an insistent flutter and reserves of soul belting". Rosen notes that the hip hop era highly influenced Beyoncé's unique rhythmic vocal style, but also finds her quite traditionalist in her use of balladry, gospel and falsetto. Other critics praise her range and power, with Chris Richards of The Washington Post saying she was "capable of punctuating any beat with goose-bump-inducing whispers or full-bore diva-roars."

Beyoncé's music is generally R&B, pop and hip hop but she also incorporates soul and funk into her songs. 4 demonstrated Beyoncé's exploration of 1990s-style R&B, as well as further use of soul and hip hop than compared to previous releases. While she almost exclusively releases English songs, Beyoncé recorded several Spanish songs for Irreemplazable (re-recordings of songs from B'Day for a Spanish-language audience), and the re-release of B'Day. To record these, Beyoncé was coached phonetically by American record producer Rudy Perez.

She has received co-writing credits for most of the songs recorded with Destiny's Child and her solo efforts. Her early songs were personally driven and female-empowerment themed compositions like "Independent Women" and "Survivor", but after the start of her relationship with Jay-Z, she transitioned to more man-tending anthems such as "Cater 2 U". Beyoncé has also received co-producing credits for most of the records in which she has been involved, especially during her solo efforts. However, she does not formulate beats herself, but typically comes up with melodies and ideas during production, sharing them with producers.

In 2001, she became the first black woman and second female lyricist to win the Pop Songwriter of the Year award at the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers Pop Music Awards. Beyoncé was the third woman to have writing credits on three number-one songs ("Irreplaceable", "Grillz" and "Check on It") in the same year, after Carole King in 1971 and Mariah Carey in 1991. She is tied with American lyricist Diane Warren at third with nine song-writing credits on number-one singles. (The latter wrote her 9/11-motivated song "I Was Here" for 4.) In May 2011, Billboard magazine listed Beyoncé at number 17 on their list of the Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters, for having co-written eight singles that hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. She was one of only three women on that list, along with Alicia Keys and Taylor Swift.
Influences

Beyoncé names Michael Jackson as her major musical influence. Aged five, Beyoncé attended her first ever concert where Jackson performed and she claims to have realized her purpose. When she presented him with a tribute award at the World Music Awards in 2006, Beyoncé said, "if it wasn't for Michael Jackson, I would never ever have performed." She admires Diana Ross as an "all-around entertainer". Beyoncé was heavily influenced by Tina Turner, who she said "Tina Turner is someone that I admire, because she made her strength feminine and sexy". and Whitney Houston, who she said "inspired me to get up there and do what she did." She credits Mariah Carey's singing and her song "Vision of Love" as influencing her to begin practicing vocal runs as a child. Her other musical influences include Prince, Lauryn Hill, Sade Adu, Donna Summer, Mary J. Blige, Janet Jackson, Anita Baker and Rachelle Ferrell.

The feminism and female empowerment themes on Beyoncé's second solo album B'Day were inspired by her role in Dreamgirls and by singer Josephine Baker. Beyoncé paid homage to Baker by performing "Déjà Vu" at the 2006 Fashion Rocks concert wearing Baker's trademark mini-hula skirt embellished with fake bananas. Beyoncé's third solo album I Am ... Sasha Fierce was inspired by Jay-Z and especially by Etta James, whose "boldness" inspired Beyoncé to explore other musical genres and styles. Her fourth solo album, 4, was inspired by Fela Kuti, 1990s R&B, Earth, Wind & Fire, DeBarge, Lionel Richie, Teena Marie, The Jackson 5, New Edition, Adele, Florence and the Machine, and Prince.

Beyoncé has stated that she is personally inspired by Michelle Obama (the 44th First Lady of the United States), saying "she proves you can do it all," and has described Oprah Winfrey as "the definition of inspiration and a strong woman." She has also discussed how Jay-Z is a continuing inspiration to her, both with what she describes as his lyrical genius and in the obstacles he has overcome in his life. Beyoncé has expressed admiration for the artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, posting in a letter "what I find in the work of Jean-Michel Basquiat, I search for in every day in music ... he is lyrical and raw". In February 2013, Beyoncé said that Madonna inspired her to take control of her own career. She commented, "I think about Madonna and how she took all of the great things she achieved and started the label and developed other artists. But there are not enough of those women."
Music videos and stage
Beyoncé performing during the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards

In 2006, Beyoncé introduced her all-female tour band Suga Mama (also the name of a song on B'Day) which includes bassists, drummers, guitarists, horn players, keyboardists and percussionists. Her background singers, The Mamas, consist of Montina Cooper-Donnell, Crystal Collins and Tiffany Moniqué Riddick. They made their debut appearance at the 2006 BET Awards and re-appeared in the music videos for "Irreplaceable" and "Green Light". The band have supported Beyoncé in most subsequent live performances, including her 2007 concert tour The Beyoncé Experience, I Am... World Tour (2009–2010), The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour (2013–2014) and The Formation World Tour (2016).

Beyoncé has received praise for her stage presence and voice during live performances. Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post placed her at number one on her list of the Five Best Singer/Dancers. According to Barbara Ellen of The Guardian Beyoncé is the most in-charge female artist she's seen onstage, while Alice Jones of The Independent wrote she "takes her role as entertainer so seriously she's almost too good." The ex-President of Def Jam L.A. Reid has described Beyoncé as the greatest entertainer alive. Jim Farber of the Daily News and Stephanie Classen of The StarPhoenix both praised her strong voice and her stage presence. Beyoncé's stage outfits have been met with criticism from many countries, such as Malaysia, where she has postponed or cancelled performances due to the country's strict laws banning revealing costumes.

Beyoncé has worked with numerous directors for her music videos throughout her career, including Melina Matsoukas, Jonas Åkerlund, and Jake Nava. Bill Condon, director of Beauty and the Beast, stated that the Lemonade visuals in particular served as inspiration for his film, commenting, "You look at Beyoncé's brilliant movie Lemonade, this genre is taking on so many different forms ... I do think that this very old-school break-out-into-song traditional musical is something that people understand again and really want."
Alter ego

Described as being "sexy, seductive and provocative" when performing on stage, Beyoncé has said that she originally created the alter ego "Sasha Fierce" to keep that stage persona separate from who she really is. She described Sasha as being "too aggressive, too strong, too sassy [and] too sexy", stating, "I'm not like her in real life at all." Sasha was conceived during the making of "Crazy in Love", and Beyoncé introduced her with the release of her 2008 album I Am ... Sasha Fierce. In February 2010, she announced in an interview with Allure magazine that she was comfortable enough with herself to no longer need Sasha Fierce. However, Beyoncé announced in May 2012 that she would bring her back for her Revel Presents: Beyoncé Live shows later that month.
Public image
A woman waves to the crowd on a red-carpet
Beyoncé at the premiere for her 2006 film, Dreamgirls

Beyoncé has been described as having a wide-ranging sex appeal, with music journalist Touré writing that since the release of Dangerously in Love, she has "become a crossover sex symbol". Offstage Beyoncé says that while she likes to dress sexily, her onstage dress "is absolutely for the stage." Due to her curves and the term's catchiness, in the 2000s (decade), the media often used the term "Bootylicious" (a portmanteau of the words booty and delicious) to describe Beyoncé, the term popularized by Destiny's Child's single of the same name. In 2006, it was added to the Oxford English Dictionary.
External image Knowles's Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover from February 15, 2007

In September 2010, Beyoncé made her runway modelling debut at Tom Ford's Spring/Summer 2011 fashion show. She was named "World's Most Beautiful Woman" by People and the "Hottest Female Singer of All Time" by Complex in 2012. In January 2013, GQ placed her on its cover, featuring her atop its "100 Sexiest Women of the 21st Century" list. VH1 listed her at number 1 on its 100 Sexiest Artists list. Several wax figures of Beyoncé are found at Madame Tussauds Wax Museums in major cities around the world, including New York, Washington, D.C., Amsterdam, Bangkok, Hollywood and Sydney.

According to Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli, Beyoncé uses different fashion styles to work with her music while performing. Her mother co-wrote a book, published in 2002, titled Destiny's Style an account of how fashion affected the trio's success. The B'Day Anthology Video Album showed many instances of fashion-oriented footage, depicting classic to contemporary wardrobe styles. In 2007, Beyoncé was featured on the cover of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, becoming the second African American woman after Tyra Banks, and People magazine recognized Beyoncé as the best-dressed celebrity.

The Beyhive is the name given to Beyoncé's fan base. Fans were previously titled "The Beyontourage", (a portmanteau of Beyoncé and entourage). The name Bey Hive derives from the word beehive, purposely misspelled to resemble her first name, and was penned by fans after petitions on the online social networking service Twitter and online news reports during competitions.

In 2006, the animal rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), criticized Beyoncé for wearing and using fur in her clothing line House of Deréon. In 2011, she appeared on the cover of French fashion magazine L'Officiel, in blackface and tribal makeup that drew criticism from the media. A statement released from a spokesperson for the magazine said that Beyoncé's look was "far from the glamorous Sasha Fierce" and that it was "a return to her African roots".

Beyoncé's lighter skin color and costuming has drawn criticism from some in the African-American community. Emmett Price, a professor of music at Northeastern University, wrote in 2007, that he thinks race plays a role in many of these criticisms, saying white celebrities who dress similarly do not attract as many comments. In 2008, L'Oréal was accused of whitening her skin in their Feria hair color advertisements, responding that "it is categorically untrue", and in 2013, Beyoncé herself criticized H&M for their proposed "retouching" of promotional images of her, and according to Vogue requested that only "natural pictures be used".

Beyoncé has been very vocal for the Black Lives Matter movement. Her song "Formation", which she sang at the 2016 Super Bowl halftime show, gained criticism from some politicians and police. Some police tried to get The Formation World Tour boycotted by other members. Beyoncé has said that she is against police brutality but is not anti-police.
Personal life

A woman stands next to a man who is performing using a microphone
Beyoncé performing on the I Am ... World Tour with Jay-Z, whom she married in 2008
Marriage and children

Beyoncé started a relationship with Jay-Z after their collaboration on " '03 Bonnie & Clyde", which appeared on his seventh album The Blueprint 2: The Gift & The Curse (2002). Beyoncé appeared as Jay-Z's girlfriend in the music video for the song, fuelling speculation about their relationship. On April 4, 2008, Beyoncé and Jay-Z married without publicity. As of April 2014, the couple had sold a combined 300 million records together. They are known for their private relationship, although they have appeared to become more relaxed in recent years. Both have acknowledged difficulty that arose in their marriage after Jay-Z had an affair.

Beyoncé suffered a miscarriage around 2010 or 2011, describing it as "the saddest thing" she had ever endured. She returned to the studio and wrote music to cope with the loss. In April 2011, Beyoncé and Jay-Z traveled to Paris to shoot the album cover for 4, and she unexpectedly became pregnant in Paris. In August, the couple attended the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, at which Beyoncé performed "Love on Top" and ended the performance by revealing she was pregnant. Her appearance helped that year's MTV Video Music Awards become the most-watched broadcast in MTV history, pulling in 12.4 million viewers; the announcement was listed in Guinness World Records for "most tweets per second recorded for a single event" on Twitter, receiving 8,868 tweets per second and "Beyonce pregnant" was the most Googled phrase the week of August 29, 2011. On January 7, 2012, Beyoncé gave birth to a daughter, Blue Ivy Carter, at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Following the release of Lemonade, which included the single "Sorry", in 2016, speculations arose about Jay-Z's alleged infidelity with a mistress referred to as "Becky". Jon Pareles in The New York Times pointed out that many of the accusations were "aimed specifically and recognizably" at him. Similarly, Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone magazine noted the lines "Suck on my balls, I've had enough" were an "unmistakable hint" that the lyrics revolve around Jay Z."

On February 1, 2017 she revealed on her Instagram account that she was expecting twins. Her announcement gained over 6.3 million "likes" within eight hours, breaking the world record for the most liked image on the website at the time. On July 13, 2017, Beyoncé uploaded the first image of herself and the twins onto her Instagram account, confirming their birth date as a month prior, on June 13, 2017 and the names Rumi and Sir Carter, with the post becoming the second most liked on Instagram, behind her own pregnancy announcement. The twins were born at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in California. She wrote of her pregnancy and its aftermath in the September 2018 issue of Vogue, in which she had full control of the cover, shot at Hammerwood Park by photographer Tyler Mitchell.
Activism

Beyoncé performed "America the Beautiful" at the 2009 presidential inauguration, as well as "At Last" during the first inaugural dance at the Neighborhood Ball two days later. They held a fundraiser at Jay-Z's 40/40 Club in Manhattan for Obama's 2012 presidential campaign which raised $4 million. In the 2012 Presidential election, Beyoncé voted for Obama. She performed the American national anthem at his second inauguration in January 2013. The Washington Post reported in May 2015, that Beyoncé attended a major celebrity fundraiser for 2016 presidential nominee Hillary Clinton. She also headlined for Hillary Clinton in a 2016 concert held the weekend before Election Day. In this performance, Beyoncé and her entourage of backup dancers wore pantsuits; a clear allusion to Clinton's frequent dress-of-choice. The backup dancers also wore "I'm with her" tee shirts, the campaign slogan for Clinton. In a brief speech at this performance Beyoncé said, "I want my daughter to grow up seeing a woman lead our country and knowing that her possibilities are limitless."

In 2013, Beyoncé stated in an interview with Vogue that she considered herself to be "a modern-day feminist". She would later align herself more publicly with the movement, sampling "We should all be feminists", a speech delivered by Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie at a TEDx talk in April 2013, in her song "Flawless", released later that year.
A woman performing using a microphone
Beyonce has conducted several fundraising and donation campaigns during her tours.

In 2014 she performed live at the MTV Video Awards in front a giant backdrop reading "FEMINIST." Her self-identification as a feminist in response incited a circulation of opinions and debate about whether her feminism is aligned with older, more established feminist ideals. Annie Lennox, celebrated artist and feminist advocate, referred to Beyoncé's use of her word feminist as 'feminist lite'. Lennox's critique of Beyoncé's feminism became particularly problematic given the consideration of the historical marginalization and continuing regulation of black women's sexual expression. Dr. bell hooks critiqued Beyoncé as referring to her as a "terrorist" towards feminism, harmfully impacting her audience of young girls. Adichie responded towards Beyoncé's feminism with "…her type of feminism is not mine, as it is the kind that, at the same time, gives quite a lot of space to the necessity of men. Adichie expands upon what 'feminist lite' means to her, referring that "more troubling is the idea, in Feminism Lite, that men are naturally superior but should be expected to "treat women well"" and "we judge powerful women more harshly than we judge powerful men. And Feminism Lite enables this." Beyoncé responded with her intent by utilizing the definition of feminist with her prestigious platform was to "give clarity to the true meaning" behind it. Beyoncé says to understand what being a feminist is, "…it's very simple. It's someone who believes in equal rights for men and women." She advocated to provide equal opportunities for young boys and girls, men and women must begin to understand the double standards that remain persistent in our society and the issue must be illuminated in effort to start making changes.

She has also contributed to the Ban Bossy campaign, which uses television and social media to encourage leadership in girls. Following Beyoncé's public identification as a feminist, the sexualized nature of her performances and the fact that she championed her marriage was questioned.

Beyoncé publicly endorsed same-sex marriage on March 26, 2013, after the Supreme Court debate on California's Proposition 8. Beyoncé spoke against North Carolina's Public Facilities Privacy & Security Act, a bill passed (and later repealed) that discriminated against the LGBT community in public places in a statement during her concert in Raleigh as part of the Formation World Tour in 2016. She has also condemned police brutality against black Americans. Beyoncé and Jay-Z attended a rally in 2013 in response to the acquittal of George Zimmerman for the shooting of Trayvon Martin. The film for her sixth album Lemonade included the mothers of Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown and Eric Garner, holding pictures of their sons in the video for "Freedom". In a 2016 interview with Elle, Beyoncé responded to the controversy surrounding her song "Formation" which was perceived to be critical of the police. She clarified, "I am against police brutality and injustice. Those are two separate things. If celebrating my roots and culture during Black History Month made anyone uncomfortable, those feelings were there long before a video and long before me".

In February 2017, Beyoncé spoke out against the withdrawal of protections for transgender students in public schools by Donald Trump's presidential administration. Posting a link to the 100 Days of Kindness campaign on her Facebook page, Beyoncé voiced her support for transgender youth and joined a roster of celebrities who spoke out against Trump's decision.

In November 2017, Beyoncé presented Colin Kaepernick with the 2017 Sports Illustrated Muhammad Ali Legacy Award, stating, "Thank you for your selfless heart and your conviction, thank you for your personal sacrifice," and that "Colin took action with no fear of consequence ... To change perception, to change the way we treat each other, especially people of color. We're still waiting for the world to catch up." Muhammad Ali was heavily penalized in his career for protesting the status quo of US civil rights through opposition to the Vietnam War, by refusing to serve in the military. 40 years later, Kaepernick had already lost one professional year due to taking a much quieter and legal stand "for people that are oppressed."
Wealth

Forbes magazine began reporting on Beyoncé's earnings in 2008, calculating that the $80 million earned between June 2007 to June 2008, for her music, tour, films and clothing line made her the world's best-paid music personality at the time, above Madonna and Celine Dion. They placed her fourth on the Celebrity 100 list in 2009 and ninth on the "Most Powerful Women in the World" list in 2010. The following year, Forbes placed her eighth on the "Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30" list, having earned $35 million in the past year for her clothing line and endorsement deals. In 2012, Forbes placed Beyoncé at number 16 on the Celebrity 100 list, twelve places lower than three years ago yet still having earned $40 million in the past year for her album 4, clothing line and endorsement deals. In the same year, Beyoncé and Jay-Z placed at number one on the "World's Highest-Paid Celebrity Couples", for collectively earning $78 million. The couple made it into the previous year's Guinness World Records as the "highest-earning power couple" for collectively earning $122 million in 2009. For the years 2009 to 2011, Beyoncé earned an average of $70 million per year, and earned $40 million in 2012. In 2013, Beyoncé's endorsements of Pepsi and H&M made her and Jay-Z the world's first billion dollar couple in the music industry. That year, Beyoncé was published as the fourth most-powerful celebrity in the Forbes rankings.

MTV estimated that by the end of 2014, Beyoncé would become the highest-paid black musician in history; this became the case in April 2014. In June 2014, Beyoncé ranked at number one on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list, earning an estimated $115 million throughout June 2013 – June 2014. This in turn was the first time she had topped the Celebrity 100 list as well as being her highest yearly earnings to date. In 2016, Beyoncé ranked at number 34 on the Celebrity 100 list with earnings of $54 million. Herself and Jay-Z also topped the highest paid celebrity couple list, with combined earnings of $107.5 million. As of 2018, Forbes calculated her net worth to be $355 million, and in June of the same year, ranked her as the 35th highest earning celebrity with annual earnings of $60 million. This tied Beyoncé with Madonna as the only two female artists to earn more than $100 million within a single year twice. As a couple with Jay-Z, they have a combined net worth of $1.16 billion. In July 2017, Billboard announced that Beyoncé was the highest paid musician of 2016, with an estimated total of $62.1 million.
Legacy
A woman is shown leaning back and singing into a microphone, surrounded by smoke
Beyoncé performing during her I Am... World Tour in 2009
See also: Destiny's Child § Legacy

In The New Yorker, music critic Jody Rosen described Beyoncé as "the most important and compelling popular musician of the twenty-first century ... the result, the logical end point, of a century-plus of pop." When The Observer named her Artist of the Decade in 2009, Llewyn-Smith wrote:

    Why Beyoncé? ... Because she made not one but two of the decade's greatest singles, with 'Crazy in Love' and 'Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)', not to mention her hits with Destiny's Child; and this was the decade when singles – particularly R&B singles – regained their status as pop's favourite medium. ... [She] and not any superannuated rock star was arguably the greatest live performer of the past 10 years. 

Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Alex Suskind noticed how Beyoncé was the decade’s (2010s) defining pop star, stating that "no one dominated music in the 2010s like Queen Bey", explaining that her "songs, album rollouts, stage presence, social justice initiatives, and disruptive public relations strategy have influenced the way we’ve viewed music since 2010."

In 2013, Beyoncé made the Time 100 list, with Baz Luhrmann writing:

    No one has that voice, no one moves the way she moves, no one can hold an audience the way she does ... When Beyoncé does an album, when Beyoncé sings a song, when Beyoncé does anything, it's an event, and it's broadly influential. Right now, she is the heir-apparent diva of the USA – the reigning national voice. 

In 2014, Beyoncé was listed again on the Time 100 and also featured on the cover of the issue. In 2018, Rolling Stone included her on its Millennial 100 list and Brittany Spanos wrote: "For 20 years, she’s been a stately pop and R&B presence: Destiny’s Child countered the glaringly white bubblegum of the time with unmatchable vocals and choreography, and their success made her solo career fail-proof. It’s one reason Beyoncé may be the most universally beloved artist of the Gen Y. A figure of talent, beauty and grace, Queen Bey has developed into the most exciting artist of the millennium as well as a political figure, setting the tone for how other major stars speak about feminism and the Black Lives Matter movement with the release of her landmark Lemonade album in 2016."

Beyoncé's work has influenced numerous artists including Adele, Alexis Jordan, Ariana Grande, Azealia Banks. Bebe Rexha, Bridgit Mendler, Britney Spears, Cheryl, Demi Lovato, Ellie Goulding, Ed Sheeran, Fifth Harmony, Florence Welch, Grimes, Hwasa, Iggy Azalea, Jessica Sanchez, Jessie J, JoJo, Kelly Rowland, Kendrick Lamar, Lady Gaga, Little Mix, Meghan Trainor, Nicole Scherzinger, Millie Bobby Brown, Rihanna, Rita Ora, Ryan Destiny SZA, Sam Smith, Tinashe, and Zendaya.

American indie rock band White Rabbits also cited her an inspiration for their third album Milk Famous (2012), and Irish singer Sinéad O'Connor cited her as the inspiration for the title of her tenth album I'm Not Bossy, I'm the Boss. Friend Gwyneth Paltrow studied Beyoncé at her live concerts while learning to become a musical performer for the 2010 film Country Strong.

Beyoncé is known for coining popular phrases such as 'put a ring on it,' a euphemism for marriage proposal, 'I woke up like this, which started a trend of posting morning selfies with the hashtag #iwokeuplikethis, and 'boy, bye,' which was used as part of the Democratic National Committee's campaign for the 2020 election. Similarly, she also came up with the phrase "visual album" following the release of her fifth studio album, which had a video for every song. This has been recreated by many other artists since, such as Frank Ocean and Melanie Martinez. The album also popularized surprise releases, with many artists releasing songs, videos or albums with no prior announcement, such as Nicki Minaj, Eminem, Frank Ocean, Jay-Z and Drake.

She is often credited for the cultural shift towards female pop singers rapping and for creating the staccato style of 'rap-singing' she used in songs like "Bug a Boo" and "Say My Name". Sheldon Pearce of Pitchfork noticed her contribution in changing the sound of pop music radio with her hip-hop assisted style, writing:

    Her hip-hop fluency gave her an advantage in the pop-star arms race, helping her to become the presiding voice in an increasingly rap-dominated musical landscape. Her evolution, from rap-adjacent R&B star (appearing as early as 1998 in a Geto Boys video) to reluctant hip-hop shareholder to full-blown rapper, played a role in slowly shifting the sound of pop radio. 

Her debut single, "Crazy in Love" was named VH1's "Greatest Song of the 2000s", NME's "Best Track of the 00s" and "Pop Song of the Century", considered by Rolling Stone to be one of the 500 greatest songs of all time, earned two Grammy Awards and is one of the best-selling singles of all time at around 8 million copies. The music video for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", which achieved fame for its intricate choreography and its deployment of jazz hands, was credited by the Toronto Star as having started the "first major dance craze of both the new millennium and the Internet", triggering a number of parodies of the dance choreography and a legion of amateur imitators on YouTube. In 2013, Drake released a single titled "Girls Love Beyoncé", which featured an interpolation from Destiny Child's "Say My Name" and discussed his relationship with women. In January 2012, research scientist Bryan Lessard named Scaptia beyonceae, a species of horse fly found in Northern Queensland, Australia after Beyoncé due to the fly's unique golden hairs on its abdomen. In July 2014, a Beyoncé exhibit was introduced into the "Legends of Rock" section of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. The black leotard from the "Single Ladies" video and her outfit from the Super Bowl half time performance are among several pieces housed at the museum. Architects credit Beyoncé's look in her "Ghost" music video as the inspiration of the design of the Premier Tower under construction in Australia.

The City of Minneapolis, Minnesota declared May 23 Beyoncé Day in the city in 2016. In 2018, the City of Columbia, South Carolina declared August 21 Beyoncé Knowles-Carter Day in the city after presenting her with the keys to Columbia.

Beyoncé inspired the character of Catherine of Aragon in the British musical Six, a modern retelling of the lives of the six wives of Henry VIII presented as a pop concert, with the character's outfit bearing resemblance to Beyoncé's from her performance at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards. Additionally, Beyoncé is featured alongside other R&B and pop divas as a primary character on the popular web parody Got 2B Real.

For their first match of March 2019, the players of the United States women's national soccer team each wore a jersey with the name of a woman they were honoring on the back; Mallory Pugh chose the name of Beyoncé.
Achievements
See also: List of awards and nominations received by Beyoncé and List of awards and nominations received by Destiny's Child

Beyoncé has received numerous awards. As a solo artist she has sold over 17 million albums in the US, and over 100 million records worldwide (a further 60 million additionally with Destiny's Child), making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time. The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) listed Beyoncé as the top certified artist of the 2000s decade, with a total of 64 certifications. Her songs "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", "Halo", and "Irreplaceable" are some of the best-selling singles of all time worldwide. In 2009, The Observer named her the Artist of the Decade and Billboard named her the Top Female Artist and Top Radio Songs Artist of the Decade. In 2010, Billboard named her in their Top 50 R&B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years list at number 15. In 2012 VH1 ranked her third on their list of the "100 Greatest Women in Music", behind Mariah Carey and Madonna. In 2002, she received Songwriter of the Year from American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers becoming the First African American woman to win the award. In 2004 and 2019, she received NAACP Image Award for Entertainer of the Year and the Soul Train Music Award for Sammy Davis Jr. – Entertainer of the Year. In 2005, she also received APEX Award at the Trumpet Award honoring achievements of Black African Americans. In 2007, Beyoncé received the International Artist of Excellence award by the American Music Awards. She also received Honorary Otto at the Bravo Otto. The following year, she received the Legend Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Arts at the World Music Awards and Career Achievement Award at the LOS40 Music Awards. In 2010, she received Award of Honor for Artist of the Decade at the NRJ Music Award and at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards, Beyoncé received the inaugural Billboard Millennium Award. Beyoncé received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards and was honored as Honorary Mother of the Year at the Australian Mother of the Year Award in Barnardo's Australia for her Humanitarian Effort in the region and the Council of Fashion Designers of America Fashion Icon Award in 2016. In 2019, alongside Jay Z, they received GLAAD Vanguard Award that is presented to a member of the entertainment community who does not identify as LGBT but who has made a significant difference in promoting equal rights for LGBT people.

Beyoncé has won 23 Grammy Awards, both as a solo artist and member of Destiny's Child and The Carters, making her the second most honored female artist by the Grammys, behind Alison Krauss and the most nominated woman in Grammy Award history with a total of 62 nominations. "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" won Song of the Year in 2010 while "Say My Name", "Crazy in Love" and "Drunk in Love" have each won Best R&B Song. Dangerously in Love, B'Day and I Am ... Sasha Fierce have all won Best Contemporary R&B Album, while Lemonade has won Best Urban Contemporary Album. Beyoncé set the record for the most Grammy awards won by a female artist in one night in 2010 when she won six awards, breaking the tie she previously held with Alicia Keys, Norah Jones, Alison Krauss, and Amy Winehouse, with Adele equaling this in 2012.

Beyoncé has also won 24 MTV Video Music Awards, making her the most-awarded artist in Video Music Award history. She won two awards each with The Carters and Destiny's Child making her lifetime total of 28 VMAs. "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" and "Formation" won Video of the Year in 2009 and 2016 respectively. Beyoncé tied the record set by Lady Gaga in 2010 for the most VMAs won in one night for a female artist with eight in 2016. She is also the most awarded and nominated artist in BET Award history, winning 29 awards from a total of 60 nominations. and most awarded person in Soul Train Music Awards with over fifteen awards as a solo artist.

Following her role in Dreamgirls, Beyoncé was nominated for Best Original Song for "Listen" and Best Actress at the Golden Globe Awards, and Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture at the NAACP Image Awards. Beyoncé won two awards at the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 2006; Best Song for "Listen" and Best Original Soundtrack for Dreamgirls: Music from the Motion Picture. According to Fuse in 2014, Beyoncé is the second most award-winning artist of all time, after Michael Jackson. Lemonade won a Peabody Award stating "Lemonade draws from the prolific literary, musical, cinematic, and aesthetic sensibilities of black cultural producers to create a rich tapestry of poetic innovation. Defying genre and convention, Lemonade immerses viewers in the sublime worlds of black women, family, and community where we experience poignant and compelling stories about the lives of women of color and the bonds of friendship seldom seen or heard in American popular culture."

She was named on the 2016 BBC Radio 4 Woman's Hour Power List as one of seven women judged to have had the biggest impact on women's lives over the past 70 years, alongside Margaret Thatcher, Barbara Castle, Helen Brook, Germaine Greer, Jayaben Desai and Bridget Jones.
Business and ventures

In 2010, Beyoncé founded her own entertainment company Parkwood Entertainment which formed as an imprint based from Columbia Records, the company began as a production unit for videos and films in 2008. Parkwood Entertainment is named after a street in Houston, Texas where Beyoncé once lived. With headquarters in New York City, the company serves as an umbrella for the entertainer's various brands in music, movies, videos, and fashion. The staff of Parkwood Entertainment have experiences in arts and entertainment, from filmmaking and video production to web and fashion design. In addition to departments in marketing, digital, creative, publicity, fashion design and merchandising, the company houses a state-of-the-art editing suite, where Beyoncé works on content for her worldwide tours, music videos, and television specials. Parkwood Entertainment's first production was the musical biopic Cadillac Records (2008), in which Beyoncé starred and co-produced. The company has also distributed Beyoncé's albums such as her self-titled fifth studio album (2013), Lemonade (2016) and The Carters, Everything is Love (2018). Beyoncé has also signed other artists to Parkwood such as Chloe x Halle, who performed at Super Bowl LIII in February 2019.
Endorsements

Beyoncé has worked with Pepsi since 2002, and in 2004 appeared in a Gladiator-themed commercial with Britney Spears, Pink, and Enrique Iglesias. In 2012, Beyoncé signed a $50 million deal to endorse Pepsi. The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPINET) wrote Beyoncé an open letter asking her to reconsider the deal because of the unhealthiness of the product and to donate the proceeds to a medical organisation. Nevertheless, NetBase found that Beyoncé's campaign was the most talked about endorsement in April 2013, with a 70 percent positive audience response to the commercial and print ads.

Beyoncé has worked with Tommy Hilfiger for the fragrances True Star (singing a cover version of "Wishing on a Star") and True Star Gold; she also promoted Emporio Armani's Diamonds fragrance in 2007. Beyoncé launched her first official fragrance, Heat, in 2010. The commercial, which featured the 1956 song "Fever", was shown after the water shed in the United Kingdom as it begins with an image of Beyoncé appearing to lie naked in a room. In February 2011, Beyoncé launched her second fragrance, Heat Rush. Beyoncé's third fragrance, Pulse, was launched in September 2011. In 2013, The Mrs. Carter Show Limited Edition version of Heat was released. The six editions of Heat are the world's best-selling celebrity fragrance line, with sales of over $400 million.

The release of a video-game Starpower: Beyoncé was cancelled after Beyoncé pulled out of a $100 million with GateFive who alleged the cancellation meant the sacking of 70 staff and millions of pounds lost in development. It was settled out of court by her lawyers in June 2013 who said that they had cancelled because GateFive had lost its financial backers. Beyoncé also has had deals with American Express, Nintendo DS and L'Oréal since the age of 18.

In March 2015, Beyoncé became a co-owner, with other artists, of the music streaming service Tidal. The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. Beyoncé's husband Jay-Z acquired the parent company of Tidal, Aspiro, in the first quarter of 2015. Including Beyoncé and Jay-Z, sixteen artist stakeholders (such as Kanye West, Rihanna, Madonna, Chris Martin, Nicki Minaj and more) co-own Tidal, with the majority owning a 3% equity stake. The idea of having an all artist owned streaming service was created by those involved to adapt to the increased demand for streaming within the current music industry.
Fashion lines

Beyoncé and her mother introduced House of Deréon, a contemporary women's fashion line, in 2005. The concept is inspired by three generations of women in their family, with the name paying tribute to Beyoncé's grandmother, Agnèz Deréon, a respected seamstress. According to Tina, the overall style of the line best reflects her and Beyoncé's taste and style. Beyoncé and her mother founded their family's company Beyond Productions, which provides the licensing and brand management for House of Deréon, and its junior collection, Deréon. House of Deréon pieces were exhibited in Destiny's Child's shows and tours, during their Destiny Fulfilled era. The collection features sportswear, denim offerings with fur, outerwear and accessories that include handbags and footwear, and are available at department and specialty stores across the US and Canada.

In 2005, Beyoncé teamed up with House of Brands, a shoe company, to produce a range of footwear for House of Deréon. In January 2008, Starwave Mobile launched Beyoncé Fashion Diva, a "high-style" mobile game with a social networking component, featuring the House of Deréon collection. In July 2009, Beyoncé and her mother launched a new junior apparel label, Sasha Fierce for Deréon, for back-to-school selling. The collection included sportswear, outerwear, handbags, footwear, eyewear, lingerie and jewelry. It was available at department stores including Macy's and Dillard's, and specialty stores Jimmy Jazz and Against All Odds. On May 27, 2010, Beyoncé teamed up with clothing store C&A to launch Deréon by Beyoncé at their stores in Brazil. The collection included tailored blazers with padded shoulders, little black dresses, embroidered tops and shirts and bandage dresses.

In October 2014, Beyoncé signed a deal to launch an activewear line of clothing with British fashion retailer Topshop. The 50–50 venture is called Ivy Park and was launched in April 2016. The brand's name is a nod to Beyoncé's daughter Blue Ivy and her favourite number four (IV in roman numerals), and also references the park where she used to run in Texas. She has since bought out Topshop owner Philip Green from his 50% share after he was alleged to have sexually harassed, bullied and racially abused employees. She now owns the brand herself. On April 4, 2019, it was announced that Beyoncé would become a creative partner with Adidas and further develop her athletic brand Ivy Park with the company. Knowles will also develop new clothes and footwear for Adidas. Shares for the company rose 1.3% upon the news release. In December, 9, 2019, they announced a launch date which will be on January 18, 2020. Beyoncé uploaded a teaser on her website and Instagram. The collection was also previewed on the upcoming Elle Magazine: January 2020 issue, where Beyoncé is seen wearing several garments, accessories and footwear from the first collection.
Philanthropy
A woman is surrounded by several others, all behind a piece of white tape
Beyoncé (center) and her mother, Tina, (left) at the opening of the Beyoncé Cosmetology Center on March 5, 2010

After Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Beyoncé and Rowland founded the Survivor Foundation to provide transitional housing for victims in the Houston area, to which Beyoncé contributed an initial $250,000. The foundation has since expanded to work with other charities in the city, and also provided relief following Hurricane Ike three years later.

Beyoncé participated in George Clooney and Wyclef Jean's Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief telethon and was named the official face of the limited edition CFDA "Fashion For Haiti" T-shirt, made by Theory which raised a total of $1 million. On March 5, 2010, Beyoncé and her mother Tina opened the Beyoncé Cosmetology Center at the Brooklyn Phoenix House, offering a seven-month cosmetology training course for men and women. In April 2011, Beyoncé joined forces with US First Lady Michelle Obama and the National Association of Broadcasters Education Foundation, to help boost the latter's campaign against child obesity by reworking her single "Get Me Bodied". Following the death of Osama bin Laden, Beyoncé released her cover of the Lee Greenwood song "God Bless the USA", as a charity single to help raise funds for the New York Police and Fire Widows' and Children's Benefit Fund.

In December 2012, Beyoncé along with a variety of other celebrities teamed up and produced a video campaign for "Demand A Plan", a bipartisan effort by a group of 950 US mayors and others designed to influence the federal government into rethinking its gun control laws, following the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Beyoncé became an ambassador for the 2012 World Humanitarian Day campaign donating her song "I Was Here" and its music video, shot in the UN, to the campaign. In 2013, it was announced that Beyoncé would work with Salma Hayek and Frida Giannini on a Gucci "Chime for Change" campaign that aims to spread female empowerment. The campaign, which aired on February 28, was set to her new music. A concert for the cause took place on June 1, 2013 in London and included other acts like Ellie Goulding, Florence and the Machine, and Rita Ora. In advance of the concert, she appeared in a campaign video released on May 15, 2013, where she, along with Cameron Diaz, John Legend and Kylie Minogue, described inspiration from their mothers, while a number of other artists celebrated personal inspiration from other women, leading to a call for submission of photos of women of viewers' inspiration from which a selection was shown at the concert. Beyoncé said about her mother Tina Knowles that her gift was "finding the best qualities in every human being." With help of the crowdfunding platform Catapult, visitors of the concert could choose between several projects promoting education of women and girls. Beyoncé is also taking part in "Miss a Meal", a food-donation campaign, and supporting Goodwill charity through online charity auctions at Charitybuzz that support job creation throughout Europe and the U.S. In December 2016, Beyoncé was named the Most Charitable Celebrity of the year.
Discography
Main articles: Beyoncé discography and songs
See also: Destiny's Child discography and The Carters § Discography

Studio Albums

    Dangerously in Love (2003)
    B'Day (2006)
    I Am... Sasha Fierce (2008)
    4 (2011)
    Beyoncé (2013)
    Lemonade (2016)

Filmography
Further information: Beyoncé videography
Tours and residencies
Main article: List of Beyoncé live performances
Headlining tours

    Dangerously in Love Tour (2003)
    The Beyoncé Experience (2007)
    I Am... World Tour (2009–2010)
    The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour (2013–2014)
    The Formation World Tour (2016)

Co-headlining tours

    Verizon Ladies First Tour (with Alicia Keys and Missy Elliott) (2004)
    On the Run Tour (with Jay-Z) (2014)
    On the Run II Tour (with Jay-Z) (2018)

Concert residencies

    I Am... Yours (2009)
    4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé (2011)
    Revel Presents: Beyoncé Live (2012)

See also
icon 	

    Book: Beyoncé

    Honorific nicknames in popular music
    List of artists who reached number one in the United States
    List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists
    List of black Golden Globe Award winners and nominees
    List of artists with the most number ones on the U.S. dance chart
    List of highest-grossing concert tours

Notes

    The gross takings from the 29 shows which were reported to Billboard Boxscore totalled $24.9 million; the tour comprised 96 concerts.

References

"DJ Khaled's single, "Top Off featuring JAY-Z, Future & B"". Billboard. March 2, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018.
"Beyoncé credited as "Third Ward Trill" on JAY-Z's album, Magna Carta Holy Grail". Global Grind. July 9, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2018.
Pipia, Emmie Martin, Tanza Loudenback, Alexa. "The 20 richest celebrities in the world". Business Insider.
"Beyoncé Knowles' name change". Boston Globe. December 23, 2009. Retrieved March 8, 2013.
Caulfield, Keith. "Beyonce Earns Sixth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Lemonade'". Billboard. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
Waxman, Olivia (January 11, 2013). "Beyoncé and Destiny's Child to Release Original Track for First Time in Eight Years". Time. Retrieved June 11, 2013.
"Radio Songs Artists of the Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2012.
"Artist of the Decade". Billboard. March 12, 2013.
"Beyoncé Knowles". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. March 17, 2014. Retrieved January 10, 2019.
"Beyoncé wins Michael Jackson vanguard vma – see full winners list here". MTV. August 25, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
Pearce, Sheldon (August 29, 2016). "MTV VMA 2016: Beyoncé Breaks Record for All-Time VMA Wins". Pitchfork. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
"Beyoncé Named Highest-Earning Black Artist Of All Time". MTV. April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
Harris-Perry, Melissa. "Beyoncé: TIME Person of the Year Runner-up". Time. Retrieved December 11, 2016.
"The Family Business". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2013.
"Beyoncé Knowles' Biography". Fox News Channel. April 15, 2008. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved November 6, 2018.
"Beyoncé and Solange Knowles Become First Sisters to Land No. 1 Albums". Etonline.com. Retrieved October 12, 2016.
Smolenyak, Megan (January 12, 2012). "A Peek into Blue Ivy Carter's Past". HuffPost. Retrieved January 30, 2012.
"Beyonce Touts L'Oreal Cosmetics That 'Match' Your Native American Shade". Indian Country Today: Digital Indingenous News. Indian Country Today. January 19, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2019.
"Beyoncé Thrilled By First Dance Teacher". Contact Music. September 6, 2006. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Biography Today. Omnigraphics. 2010. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-7808-1058-7.
"Beyoncé Knowles: Biography – Part 1". People. Archived from the original on April 26, 2007.
"Beyoncé Knowles Biography". Contact Music. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Maughan, Jennifer. "Beyoncé Knowles Childhood". Life123. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011.
"Famous Alumni". Elsik High School. Archived from the original on August 14, 2004.
"Cameo: Fat Joe Interviews Beyoncé and Mike Epps". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008.
Kaufman, Gil (June 13, 2005). "Destiny's Child's Long Road To Fame (The Song Isn't Called "Survivor" For Nothing)". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
"Kelly Rowland". CNN. February 27, 2006. Archived from the original on February 27, 2013. Retrieved February 1, 2012.
Farley, Christopher John (January 15, 2001). "Music: Call Of The Child". Time. Archived from the original on November 30, 2007.
Reynolds, J.R. (March 3, 1998). "All Grown Up". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved January 12, 2007.
Tyrangiel, Josh (June 13, 2003). "Destiny's Adult". Time. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008.
Dekel-Daks, Tal (January 29, 2013). "Ten Things About ... Destiny's Child". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 22, 2013.
"The Best Man – Original Soundtrack". AllMusic. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
"Beyoncé: 'I was depressed at 19'". Contact Music. December 1, 2008. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012.
"Beyoncé Speaks About Her Past Depression". Access Hollywood. December 15, 2006. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008.
Johnson, Caitlin A. (December 13, 2006). "Beyoncé On Love, Depression, and Reality". CBS News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008.
"Beyoncé Knowles Opens Up About Depression". Female First. CBS Interactive Inc. December 18, 2006. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008.
Dunn, Jancee (June 10, 2001). "Date with destiny". The Observer. London. Retrieved February 27, 2009.
Basham, David (January 18, 2001). "Beyoncé To Star In "Carmen" Remake". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Todd, Martens (July 3, 2003). "Beyoncé, Branch Albums Storm The Chart". Billboard. Retrieved April 1, 2008.
"Past Winners Search: "Destiny's Child" – National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences". The Recording Academy. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Ebert, Roger (July 26, 2002). "Austin Powers in Goldmember". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved February 25, 2011.
"Austin Powers in Goldmember". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 23, 2012.
Moss, Corey (May 23, 2002). "Beyoncé, Britney Serve Up First Singles From 'Goldmember'". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Tobey, Matthew. "The Fighting Temptations". Allmovie. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"The Fighting Temptations". Metacritic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"The Fighting Temptations (2003)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Gonzalez, Ed (September 14, 2003). "The Fighting Temptations Original Soundtrack". Slant Magazine. Retrieved March 22, 2011.
"Beyoncé Tempts Fans With More Movie Songs". Billboard. October 11, 2003. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Martens, Todd (November 28, 2003). "'Stand Up' Ends 'Baby Boy' Reign". Billboard. Retrieved April 2, 2008.
"'03 Bonnie & Clyde". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
"Dangerously in Love – Beyoncé". AllMusic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Todd, Martens (July 2, 2003). "Beyoncé, Branch Albums Storm The Chart". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2008.
Chandler, D. L. (April 5, 2011). "Jay-Z And Beyoncé Celebrate Three Years Of Wedded Bliss". MTV Rapfix. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 8, 2011.
Martens, Todds (August 21, 2003). "Beyoncé, Jay-Z: 'Crazy' As Ever". Billboard. Retrieved February 10, 2011.
"Beyoncé Album and Song Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved June 13, 2011.
Patel, Joseph (February 4, 2004). "Beyoncé Wins Most, Outkast Shine, 50 Cent Shut Out at Grammys". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 20, 2011.
Patel, Joseph (January 28, 2004). "Beyoncé, Alicia Keys And Missy Elliott Plan Spring Tour". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012.
Alexis, Nadeska (October 16, 2012). "Beyoncé To Perform at Super Bowl XLVII Halftime Show". MTV News. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Patel, Joseph (January 1, 2004). "Beyoncé Puts Off Second Solo LP To Reunite Destiny's Child". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 15, 2008.
"Destiny Fulfilled – Destiny's Child". AllMusic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Whitmire, Margo (November 24, 2004). "Eminem Thankful To Remain No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Gold and Platinum – Destiny's Child". Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved November 13, 2008.
"Destiny's Child Album and Song Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Destiny's Child Debuts World Children's Day(TM) at McDonald's(R) Anthem" (Press release). Los Angeles. PR Newswire. November 15, 2005. Retrieved November 15, 2013.
Cohen, Jonathan (June 15, 2005). "Destiny's Child To Split After Fall Tour". Billboard. Retrieved April 1, 2008.
"Number 1's – Destiny's Child". AllMusic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Destiny's Child gets Walk of Fame star". Today. March 29, 2006. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2011.
Hoffmann, Melody K. (July 2, 2007). "'Ms. Kelly' Takes Charge Sings About Healing And Heartbreak in New Music". Jet: 61. Retrieved July 18, 2014.
Welch, Andy (May 22, 2014). "Destiny's Child reunite on new Michelle Williams song 'Say Yes' – listen". NME. Retrieved July 18, 2014.
"B'day – Beyoncé". AllMusic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Hasty, Katie (September 13, 2006). "Beyoncé's B-Day Makes Big Bow at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved January 5, 2008.
"Beyoncé – Irreplaceable". australian-charts.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Hope, Clover (September 14, 2006). "Timberlake's 'Sexy' Fends Off Fergie For No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved February 3, 2008.
"Get Me Bodied". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 5, 2009.
"Green Light the next single". Sony BMG Music Entertainment (UK). July 27, 2007. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009.
"49th Annual Grammy Awards Winners List". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on December 20, 2006. Retrieved January 10, 2008.
"50th Annual Grammy Award Winners List". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on April 4, 2008. Retrieved April 21, 2008.
Otto, Jeff (February 8, 2006). "Interview: Beyoncé Knowles". IGN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011.
"The Pink Panther (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Dreamgirls". Internet Broadway Database. Retrieved April 25, 2013.
"Dreamgirls". Metacritic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Dreamgirls (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Dreamgirls (2006) – Daily Box Office – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 19, 2013.
Condon, Bill – Director (December 15, 2006). Dreamgirls (Motion picture). United States: DreamWorks SKG.
"Dreamgirls (Music from the Motion Picture)". AllMusic. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Whitfield, Deanne (October 27, 2007). "Malaysia's loss is Indonesia's gain: Beyoncé Knowles to play Jakarta". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on July 5, 2011. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Concepcion, Mariel (October 3, 2009). "Taking It Onstage". Billboard. 121 (39). p. 38. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved June 8, 2013.
"B'Day (Deluxe Edition) – Beyoncé". AllMusic. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
Helling, Steve (April 22, 2008). "Beyoncé and Jay-Z File Signed Marriage License". People. Archived from the original on April 22, 2008.
Clinton, Ivory (April 23, 2008). "Beyoncé Dishes on Her Sassy Alter-Ego". People. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"I Am ... Sasha Fierce". AllMusic. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Is Beyoncé beyond her best?". News.com.au. April 12, 2009. Retrieved September 15, 2016.
Jonathan, Cohen (November 26, 2008). "Beyoncé Starts 'Fierce' Atop Album Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008.
Cohen, Jonathan (January 1, 2009). "Beyoncé Starts 2009 Atop The Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011.
"Beyoncé – Halo". australian-charts.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Beyoncé: Chart History by Weeks on Chart".
"Don Omar: The Reggaeton Starts Plugs In For Digital Sales With 'IDon' And An iPhone App". Billboard. 121 (16): 41. April 25, 2009. ISSN 0006-2510.
"Beyoncé – Sweet Dreams". australian-charts.com. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
Crawford, Trish (January 23, 2009). "Beyoncé's single an anthem for women". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009.
Smith, Olivia (November 6, 2009). "Beyoncé wows in racy red costume at MTV Europe Music Awards". Daily News. New York. Retrieved December 27, 2011.
Singh, Anita (August 26, 2009). "Mobo Awards 2009 nominations unveiled". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved December 15, 2010.
Nero, Mark Edward. "2009 BET Awards". About.com. Retrieved February 28, 2011.
Rodriguez, Jayson; Montgomery, James; Reid, Shaheem (September 13, 2009). "Kanye West Crashes VMA Stage During Taylor Swift's Award Speech". MTV News. Retrieved June 6, 2011.
Casserly, Meghan (December 10, 2012). "Beyoncé's $50 Million Pepsi Deal Takes Creative Cues From Jay-Z". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012.
Masterson, Lawrie (April 12, 2009). "Is Beyoncé Beyond Her Best?". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved October 21, 2012.
"2008 13th Annual Satellite Awards Nominees". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008.
"The 40th NAACP Image Awards". NAACP Image Award. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009.
Harling, Danielle (January 5, 2007). "Beyoncé Donates Movie Salary To Drug Treatment Centers". Black Entertainment Television. Archived from the original on May 9, 2009.
Kaufman, Gil (January 16, 2009). "Beyoncé To Sing For Obamas' First Dance at Inaugural Ball". MTV News. Retrieved June 13, 2011.
Lewis, Hilary (April 25, 2009). "Box Office Preview: Audience Obsessed With Beyoncé". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Cadillac Records". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
"Obsessed". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
Wigler, Josh (June 6, 2010). "2010 MTV Movie Awards: Complete Winners List". MTV News. Retrieved July 17, 2011.
Donahue, Ann (December 20, 2009). "Beyoncé, Taylor Swift, Peas Lead Grammy Award Nominations". Billboard. Retrieved December 3, 2009.
Lamb, Bill. "Beyoncé Tied With Lauryn Hill For Most Grammy Nominations in a Single Year by a Female Artist". About.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2009.
"Artist Chart History – Beyoncé". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Lady Gaga feat. Beyoncé – "Telephone"". australian-charts.com. Retrieved October 21, 2012.
Trust, Gary (March 15, 2010). "Lady Gaga, Beyoncé Match Mariah's Record". Billboard. Retrieved March 18, 2010.
DeCrow, Jason (December 1, 2010). "Nominations list for the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards". USA Today. Retrieved December 2, 2010.
Sperling, Daniel. "Beyoncé: 'Career break saved my sanity'". Digital Spy. Retrieved February 23, 2013.
Gardner, Elysa (January 28, 2010). "Beyoncé is poised to take a well-deserved break in 2010". USA Today. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
Kennedy, Gerrick D. (March 28, 2011). "Beyoncé Severs Management Ties with Father". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
Vena, Jocelyn (June 28, 2011). "Beyoncé Shrugs Off 'Fear' In 'Year Of 4'". MTV News. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
Knowles, Beyoncé. "Eat, Play, Love". Essence. Retrieved June 3, 2013.
"Beyoncé to Headline Glastonbury Festival" (Press release). Columbia Records. February 10, 2011. Retrieved February 12, 2011.
Phillips, Sarah (June 28, 2011). "Beyoncé headlining at Glastonbury was a great girl power moment". The Guardian. London.
"4 – Beyoncé". AllMusic. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Beyoncé – Run the World (Girls)". australian-charts.com. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
"Love on Top":

    Grein, Paul (March 7, 2012). "Week Ending March 4, 2012. Songs: The Song That TV Made Famous". Yahoo! Music. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    Santiago, Karinah (March 9, 2012). "Chart Juice: Mary J. Blige Notches Record-Extending Top 10 Single". Billboard. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    Santiago, Karinah (March 16, 2012). "Chart Juice: Rihanna, Usher Roar Into Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    Grein, Paul (March 21, 2012). "Week Ending March 18, 2012. Songs: Your '80s Party Mix-Tape". Yahoo! Music. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    Santiago, Karinah (March 30, 2012). "Chart Juice: LoveRance Rises 'Up!' to Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    Santiago, Karinah (April 6, 2012). "Chart Juice: Melanie Fiona Notches First No. 1 on R&B/Hip-Hop Albums". Billboard. Retrieved June 20, 2012.
    "R&B/Hip-Hop Songs: Week of April 21, 2012". Billboard. Retrieved April 21, 2012.

Dillon, Nancy (May 2, 2012). "Beyoncé set to win a writing award from the New York Association of Black Journalists". Daily News. Retrieved May 8, 2012.
"Beyoncé To Perform '4 Intimate Nights With Beyoncé' At New York's Roseland Ballroom". Beyoncé's Official Website. August 5, 2011. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
"Beyoncé's 4 Certified Platinum". Rap-Up. August 1, 2011. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
Grein, Paul (July 2, 2014). "Chart Watch: Ed Sheeran's Transatlantic #1". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.
Prance, Sam (February 5, 2011). "Beyoncé Breaks Spotify Record as '4' Hits a Billion Streams". MTV. Retrieved February 6, 2011.
Carbone, Nick (January 8, 2012). "Beyoncé's Baby Arrives: Blue Ivy Carter Born Saturday in New York City". Time. Retrieved March 31, 2015.
"Fourth Show Added at Revel". Beyoncé's Official Website. May 7, 2012. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 8, 2012.
Makarechi, Kia (May 25, 2012). "Beyoncé, Revel: Singer's Atlantic City Concerts Mark First Return To Stage Since Blue Ivy Carter Was Born". HuffPost. Retrieved October 22, 2012.
Garibaldi, Christina (January 11, 2013). "Destiny's Child Drop New Single 'Nuclear'". MTV News. Retrieved January 13, 2013.
Richards, Chris (January 10, 2013). "Beyoncé to sing 'The Star-Spangled Banner' at inauguration". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 11, 2013.
"Beyoncé answers lip-sync critics at Super Bowl presser". CBC News. Associated Press. January 31, 2013. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved February 1, 2013.
"Beyoncé to Perform at Super Bowl Halftime Show". Rap-Up. October 16, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2012.
"2013 VMAs Shatter Twitter Records". August 26, 2013. Retrieved October 29, 2013.
"List of winners at the 55th Grammy Awards". Rap-Up. February 10, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2013.
"Beyoncé Reveals Herself in 'Life Is But a Dream' HBO Documentary (Trailer)". Rap-Up. January 11, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013.
Acuna, Kirsten (January 23, 2013). "HBO Wasn't 'Crazy in Love' With Beyoncé Co-Directing Her Documentary". Business Insider. Retrieved May 20, 2017.
"Beyoncé announces 2014 UK and Ireland tour taking in O2 Arena and more". Metro. UK. December 11, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013.
Malkin, Marc. "Beyoncé Covering Amy Winehouse for The Great Gatsby". E News. Retrieved April 2, 2013.
Montgomery, James (May 31, 2012). "Beyoncé Cast As Queen Tara in 3-D Animated Film 'Epic'". MTV News. Retrieved June 1, 2012.
"Beyoncé Creates Original Song "Rise Up" for the Upcoming Motion Picture EPIC". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2013.
Ramsay, Jennifer. "BEYONCÉ Shatters iTunes Store Records With 828,773 Albums Sold in Just Three Days". Apple. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013.
Caulfield, Keith (December 17, 2013). "It's Official: Beyoncé Makes History With Fifth No. 1 Album". Billboard. Retrieved December 17, 2013.
Sisario, Ben (December 16, 2013). "Beyoncé Rejects Tradition for Social Media's Power". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2014.
Makarechi, Kia (December 18, 2013). "Beyoncé's Album Sales Cross 1 Million in iTunes". HuffPost. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
Mackay, Emily. "Beyoncé – Beyoncé". NME. Retrieved December 17, 2013.
Trust, Gary (February 5, 2014). "Katy Perry Tops Hot 100, Beyoncé Bounds to No. 2". Billboard. Retrieved February 5, 2014.
Smith, Stephanie (April 15, 2014). "Beyoncé & Jay-Z touring together this summer". Page Six. Retrieved April 27, 2014.
"On The Run Tour: Beyoncé and Jay-Z". Live Nation Entertainment. PR Newswire. April 29, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
Grow, Kory (August 7, 2014). "Beyoncé to Receive MTV Video Vanguard Award, Perform at VMAs". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 7, 2014.
"Top-Earning Women in Music 2014". Forbes. November 4, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2014.
"Music subscription revenues help drive growth in most major markets". International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. March 18, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014.
"IFPI publishes Recording Industry in Numbers – an essential guide to the global music market". International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. April 20, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
Copsey, Rob (March 6, 2015). "Beyoncé revealed as most-streamed female artist by women". Official Charts Company. Retrieved March 6, 2015.
"Beyoncé's Powerful Grammys Performance Brings The House Down". HuffPost. February 8, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
"Kanye West storms Grammy stage, rants about Beck's surprise album of the year win". Fox News Channel. February 9, 2015. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015.
Kreps, Daniel (February 6, 2016). "Watch Beyoncé's Surprise New Video For 'Formation'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 10, 2016.
Elgot, Jessica (February 8, 2016). "Beyoncé unleashes Black Panthers homage at Super Bowl 50". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
"Black Pride at the Super Bowl? Beyoncé embodies a new political moment". The Guardian. February 8, 2016. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
"Beyoncé sends political message with Super Bowl halftime performance of new single, "Formation"". CBS News. Retrieved April 25, 2016.
Waddell, Ray (February 8, 2016). "Beyoncé to Embark on 'Formation' Stadium Tour". Billboard. Retrieved February 10, 2016.
Pesce, Nicole Lyn (February 10, 2016). "Five clues that Beyoncé's next album is dropping any minute now". Daily News. New York. Retrieved February 11, 2016.
Bundy, Will (October 7, 2016). "Beyoncé brings out Jay-Z, Kendrick Lamar and Serena Williams on last night of tour". The Fader. Retrieved October 8, 2016.
Billboard Staff (November 20, 2016). "AMAs 2016: See the Full List of Winners". Billboard. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
Stutz, Colin (April 16, 2016). "Beyoncé Posts Video Teaser for 'Lemonade' Project: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved April 16, 2016.
Caulfield, Keith (May 1, 2016). "Beyoncé Earns Sixth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Lemonade'". Billboard. Retrieved July 5, 2016.
Mendizabal, Amaya (May 2, 2016). "All 12 of Beyoncé's 'Lemonade' Tracks Debut on Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
Coscarelli, Joe (May 3, 2016). "Beyoncé's 'Lemonade' Debuts at No. 1 With Huge Streaming Numbers". The New York Times. Retrieved May 16, 2016.
Caulfield, Keith (January 5, 2017). "Drake's 'Views' Is Nielsen Music's Top Album of 2016 in the U.S". Billboard. Retrieved September 25, 2017.
Rys, Dan (April 25, 2017). "Beyonce's 'Lemonade' Was the World's Best-Selling Album in 2016". Variety. Retrieved September 25, 2017.
"Gold & Platinum". RIAA. Retrieved July 4, 2019.
"Critic Reviews for Lemonade". Metacritic. Retrieved July 5, 2016.
"50 Best Albums of 2016". Rolling Stone. November 28, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016.
Brown, Eric (July 26, 2016). "Beyoncé and Adele lead 2016 MTV VMA nominations". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
"VMAs 2016 Winners List". Billboard. August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
McCluskey, Megan (August 29, 2016). "Beyoncé Breaks Madonna's Record With More VMAs Than Any Artist Ever". Time. Retrieved August 30, 2016.
Herbert, Geoff. "Time Person of the Year: 2016 finalists revealed – who should win?". Syracuse.com. Retrieved December 8, 2016.
Vaglanos, Alanna (January 4, 2017). "For The First Time Ever, A Black Woman Will Be Headlining Coachella". HuffPost. AOL. Retrieved January 7, 2017.
Strauss, Matthew (February 23, 2017). "Beyoncé Will Not Perform at Coachella 2017". Pitchfork. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
"Beyoncé Cancels Coachella, Ticket Prices Drop 12 Percent". Yahoo. February 24, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
Morris, Christopher (December 6, 2016). "2017 Grammy Awards: Adele, Beyoncé Lead Nominations". Variety. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
Blair, Olivia (February 13, 2017). "Grammy Awards 2017: Beyoncé tearful as Adele dedicates Album of the Year win to Lemonade". The Independent. Retrieved February 13, 2017.
Bond, Nick (February 13, 2017). "Adele refuses biggest Grammy win: 'I can't possibly accept this award'". The New Zealand Herald. Retrieved May 1, 2017.
"Jay Z Spotted Arriving at Los Angeles Hospital After Beyoncé Gives Birth to Twins".
"Beyoncé Joins 'Mi Gente' Remix, Donates Proceeds To Hurricane Relief".
White, Jack (November 30, 2017). "Ed Sheeran's Perfect remix features Beyoncé". Official Charts Company. Retrieved November 30, 2017.
Trust, Gary (December 11, 2017). "Ed Sheeran & Beyonce's 'Perfect' Tops Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved December 11, 2017.
JayZVEVO (January 4, 2018). "JAY-Z – Family Feud ft. Beyoncé" – via YouTube.
Kaufman, Gil (March 3, 2018). "DJ Khaled Premieres 'Top Off' Featuring JAY-Z, Future & Beyoncé: Stream". Billboard. Los Angeles, California: Eldridge Industries. Retrieved March 4, 2018.
"New Beyoncé, Jay-Z on the Run Tour Info Leaked". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. March 7, 2018.
Reed, Ryan (March 12, 2018). "Beyonce, Jay-Z Unite for Joint OTR II Stadium Tour". Rolling Stone. New York City: Wenner Media LLC. Retrieved May 9, 2018.
Beyoncé (March 12, 2018). "OTR II" – via YouTube.
Crucchiola, Jordan (March 18, 2018). "Beyoncé and Jay-Z Have Gone 'On the Run' to Film a Video in Jamaica". Vulture.com. New York City: New York Media. Retrieved May 9, 2018.
Wood, Mikael (April 15, 2018). "Beyoncé's Coachella performance was incredible – and she knew it". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, California: Tronc. Retrieved April 15, 2018.
Exposito, Suzy (April 15, 2018). "#Beychella: Beyonce Schools Festivalgoers in Her Triumphant Return". Rolling Stone. New York City: Wenner Media LLC. Retrieved April 15, 2018.
Iasimone, Ashley (June 16, 2018). "Beyonce & JAY-Z, AKA the Carters, Drop Joint 'Everything Is Love' Album". Billboard. Retrieved June 16, 2018.
Elder, Sajae (June 16, 2018). "Beyoncé and Jay Z release the video for their single "Apeshit"". The Fader. Retrieved June 16, 2018.
Anon. (June 23, 2018). "Beyoncé and Jay-Z visited the Louvre to shoot a video and somehow kept it a secret". CBC Radio. Retrieved June 26, 2018.
Caulfield, Keith (June 24, 2018). "5 Seconds of Summer Earn Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Youngblood'". Billboard. Retrieved June 25, 2018.
"Beyoncé and Jay-Z leave their hearts on stage and gave us EVERYTHING". TimesLIVE.
"Beyonce's Global Citizen Outfits Celebrated Africa's Diversity". ELLE.
"Beyoncé's 'Homecoming': 5 Things We Learned About Her Coachella Triumph". The New York Times.
"Betonce's Homecoming on Netflix Is an Historically Black Experience". The Grapevine.
"Beyonce Surprise Drops Live Coachella Album, Netflix Doc Now Streaming". NPR.
Aswad, Jem; Halperin, Shirley (April 19, 2019). "Beyonce's Netflix Deal Worth a Whopping $60 Million (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved April 19, 2019.
"2019 Emmy nominations: Complete list". Los Angeles Times. July 16, 2019. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019.
Lesnick, Silas (April 25, 2017). "Disney Movie Release Schedule Gets a Major Update". ComingSoon.net. Retrieved April 25, 2017.
"Beyoncé Top Choice to Voice Nala in 'Lion King' Remake (Exclusive)". Variety. March 30, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017.
Verhoeven, Beatrice (November 1, 2017). "Beyonce Will Voice Nala in Live-Action Adaptation of 'The Lion King'". TheWrap. Retrieved November 1, 2017.
Pallotta, Frank (November 2, 2017). "Beyoncé joins cast of Disney's live-action 'Lion King'". CNN. Retrieved November 2, 2017.
Gonzales, Erica (January 24, 2019). "Beyoncé Is Singing "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" in the Lion King Remake". Harper Bazzar. Retrieved February 25, 2019.
Strauss, Matthew (July 9, 2019). "Beyoncé Releasing New Song "Spirit" Tonight, Curates Lion King Album". Pitchfork Media. Retrieved July 9, 2019.
"Sir Elton John confirms new Tim Rice collaboration for Disney's The Lion King remake". Digital Spy. February 10, 2018. Retrieved February 11, 2018.
Rogers, Ray (May 11, 2011). "Beyoncé Q&A: The Billboard Music Awards Millennium Artist Discusses Her Career And New Album". Billboard. Retrieved May 10, 2012.
Rosen, Jody (June 3, 2014). "The Woman on Top of the World". The New York Times. Retrieved June 20, 2014.
Cardwell, Diane (September 9, 2001). "Fame; In Sync". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 26, 2011.
Pareles, Jon (August 1, 2005). "Empowerment, Allure and a Runway's Flair". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 27, 2013.
Richards, Chris (September 6, 2006). "Beyoncé's 'B'Day' Is Nothing to Celebrate". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012.
Kellman, Andy. "Beyoncé, the Bio". AllMusic. Retrieved August 29, 2018.
Hasted, Nick (April 26, 2013). "Music review: Behold Beyoncé, the cybernetic goddess of R&B". The Independent. London. Retrieved July 26, 2013.
Petridis, Alexis (November 13, 2008). "Pop review: Beyoncé, I Am ... Sasha Fierce". The Guardian. London. Retrieved November 2, 2012.
Lone, Mahlia (June 30, 2017). "Jay Z & Beyoncé the King & Queen of Hip Hop". Good Times. Retrieved January 1, 2019.
Vineyard, Jennifer. "Beyoncé: Behind The B'Day Videos 1". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 7, 2007.
Vineyard, Jennifer (October 4, 2005). "Beyoncé Shoots Down Jay-Z Marriage Rumors in Vanity Fair Interview". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Moss, Correy. "Beyoncé: Genuinely in Love – Part 2". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 4, 2003.
Neal, Rome (February 11, 2009). "Beyoncé Tries For Timeless". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 14, 2003.
Bronson, Fred (December 6, 2006). "Chart Beat Chat". Billboard. Retrieved March 29, 2011.
Wieselman, Jarett (June 1, 2011). "Diane Warren talks greatest hits, Beyoncé & Due Voci". New York Post. Archived from the original on June 3, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011.
Caulfield, Keith; Trust, Gary (May 23, 2011). "Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters Performance". Billboard. Retrieved September 13, 2011.
"Beyoncé, Top Stars Tip Their Hats to Michael Jackson". People. June 27, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009.
"One-on-one with the great Beyoncé transcript". Yahoo!. October 11, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014.
"Michael Jackson returns to stage". BBC News. November 16, 2006. Retrieved June 7, 2014.
Watson, Margeaux (August 29, 2006). "Influences: Beyoncé". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 7, 2007.
Caldwell, Rebecca. "Beyoncé Knowles admire "Tina Turner is someone that I admire". quotefancy. Retrieved December 8, 2018.
Caldwell, Rebecca (July 21, 2001). "Destiny's Child". The Globe and Mail. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: The Woodbridge Company. p. R1. Retrieved May 9, 2018.
"The 50 Best R&B Albums of the '90s". Complex. Retrieved July 24, 2014.
Frere-Jones, Sasha (April 3, 2006). "Mariah Carey's record-breaking career". The New Yorker. Retrieved July 25, 2010.
"Exclusive: Beyoncé Talks Prince: "I Was So Scared!"". GIANT. Radio One. June 7, 2010. Archived from the original on June 16, 2010.
Bickel, Britt (April 6, 2012). "Beyoncé Shares Personal Family Photos, Thanks Sade On New Website". CBS Radio. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2012.
Bain, Becky (May 18, 2013). "Beyoncé Pays Tribute To Donna Summer: "She Was An Honest And Gifted Singer"". Idolator. Retrieved July 15, 2013.
Gibson, Cristina & Ashley Fultz (January 14, 2011). "Which Famous Friend's B-Day Did Jay-Z and Beyoncé Celebrate?". E!. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011.
Gelman, Jason & Janine Coveney (January 11, 2001). "Inspired By". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo!!!! Inc. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012.
Reid, Shaheem (July 19, 2006). "Beyoncé Asks Women To Battle Over Her For Backing-Band Roles". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011.
"Beyoncé Hits Milestone". ABC News. September 7, 2006. Archived from the original on February 18, 2007.
Weinstein, Farrah (September 8, 2006). "Beyoncé, Jay-Z, Christina Put The Rock in Fashion Rocks Concert". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011.
Vineyard, Jennifer (October 9, 2008). "Beyoncé Releases Two Tracks From 'I Am ... ', Inspired By Jay-Z And Etta James". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 25, 2011.
"Beyoncé Inspired by Michelle Obama". Rap-Up. February 25, 2011. Retrieved June 12, 2011.
Alvarez, Gabriel (July 19, 2011). "Beyoncé: Mighty Fly (2011 Cover Story & Gallery)". Complex. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
"Basquiat". beyonce.com. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved June 7, 2013.
Mahlmeister, Chrissy. "Beyoncé Wears Custom Jean-Michel Basquiat-Inspired Minx Nails". MTV Style. Retrieved June 7, 2013.
Corner, Lewis (February 19, 2013). "Beyoncé: 'There are not enough independent women like Madonna'". Digital Spy. London, England. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
"For The Record: Quick News On Beyoncé, Madonna, Michael Jackson, Taylor Hicks, JC Chasez, Beth Orton, Slayer & More". MTV News. June 8, 2006. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
Wieselman, Jarett (March 4, 2011). "The Five Best Singer/Dancers". New York Post. Retrieved June 6, 2016.
Ellen, Barbara (May 24, 2009). "She's a woman of two-halves". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009.
Jones, Alice (May 27, 2009). "Beyoncé, 02 Arena, London: Diva who answers the call of booty". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009.
"Music exec: 'Beyoncé is greatest entertainer alive'". MSN. Retrieved August 31, 2013.
Farber, Jim (June 21, 2009). "Beyoncé shows 'Fierce' and softer sides in tour kickoff at the Garden". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on March 11, 2011.
Classen, Stephanie (March 28, 2009). "Beyoncé no ordinary performer". The StarPhoenix. Retrieved March 31, 2009.[dead link]
"24 Celebs Who Were Banned From Other Countries".
"How La La Land Helped Live-Action Beauty and the Beast Remake". March 18, 2017.
Crosley, Hillary (February 26, 2010). "Beyoncé Says She 'Killed' Sasha Fierce". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011.
"Beyoncé Prepares for Revel Concerts (Part 2)". Rap-Up. May 25, 2012. Retrieved May 28, 2012.
Touré (March 4, 2004). "Cover Story: A Woman Possessed". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 2, 2009.
"Beyoncé Knowles". Glamour. Archived from the original on March 3, 2008.
Barlett, Liam (March 11, 2007). "Bootylicious Beyoncé". 60 Minutes. Archived from the original on August 10, 2011.
Eisinger, Amy (May 22, 2009). "'Bootylicious' Beyoncé says it's 'sexier' to stay out of the gym". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011.
Lamb, Bill (March 17, 2006). "Beyoncé and Destiny's Child Enter the Dictionary With Bootylicious". About.com. Archived from the original on December 4, 2007.
Talarico, Brittany (January 4, 2011). "WATCH: Beyoncé, Julianne Moore Strut Down Tom Ford Catwalk". OK!. Retrieved January 12, 2011.
Chili, Alexis (April 25, 2012). "Motherhood Makes Beyoncé Feel 'More Beautiful Than Ever'". People. Retrieved March 8, 2013.
Nostro, Lauren; Patterson, Julian (December 10, 2012). "1. Beyoncé – The 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time". Complex. Retrieved December 12, 2012.
Wallace, Amy (January 9, 2013). "Miss Millennium: Beyoncé". GQ. p. 1. Retrieved January 19, 2013.
"The Real Version of the Cover Everyone Is Talking About". GQ. January 9, 2013. Retrieved January 19, 2013.
Viera, Bené. "VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists [Complete List]". VH1. Archived from the original on March 13, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2013.
"Beyoncé's wax figure at Madame Tussauds New York". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on August 13, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2011.
"Beyoncé wax figure at Madame Tussauds Washington D.C". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on August 15, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2011.
"Beyoncé wax figure at Amsterdam". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on March 2, 2009.
"Beyoncé Knowles' wax figure at Madame Tussauds Bangkok". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on February 8, 2011.
"Beyoncé's wax figure at Madame Tussauds Hollywood". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on June 29, 2009.
"A Madame Tussauds employee moves a wax figure of Beyoncé at the international airport in Sydney". Yahoo! News (Philippines). February 28, 2013. Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved March 1, 2013.
Hosking, Patrick; Wighton, David (August 8, 2007). "Beyoncé wearing one of my dresses is harmony". The Times. London. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011.
Destiny's Style: Bootylicious Fashion, Beauty and Lifestyle Secrets From Destiny's Child. Amazon.com. ISBN 978-0756793517.
"Book Excerpt: Destiny's Style". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 5, 2006.
Vineyard, Jennifer. "Beyoncé: Behind The B'Day Videos 3". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 18, 2007.
"Beyoncé Knowles: Biography – Part 2". People. Archived from the original on May 4, 2007.
Goldsmith, Belinda (September 13, 2007). "Beyoncé tops fashion list". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
"Video Premiere: 'I Was Here (Live At Roseland)'". Beyonceonline.com. November 16, 2011. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2012.
"PETA surprises Beyoncé at New York dinner". Associated Press via Today. June 16, 2006. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2011.
"Beyoncé Criticized for 'Blackface' Photo Shoot". Rolling Stone. February 24, 2011. Archived from the original on February 27, 2011.
Jones, Vanessa E. (August 5, 2007). "Bewitched. Bothered. Beyoncé". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008.
Sweney, Mark (August 8, 2008). "Beyoncé Knowles: L'Oreal accused of 'whitening' singer in cosmetics ad". The Guardian. London.
"Beyoncé L'Oreal ad controversy inspires black community backlash". NBC News.
Alexander, Ella. "H&M For All: A Healthy Start". Vogue. Retrieved May 30, 2013.
"Beyoncé is a powerful voice for Black Lives Matter. Some people hate her for it". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 3, 2018.
"Beyoncé: 'Anyone Who Perceives My Message as Anti-Police Is Completely Mistaken'". Time. Retrieved December 3, 2018.
"When Did Beyoncé and Jay-Z Start Dating?". Capital FM. Archived from the original on May 21, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2014.
Chandler, D.L. "Jay-Z and Beyoncé Celebrate Three Years of Wedded Bliss". MTV Rapfix. Archived from the original on April 8, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2013.
"Beyoncé Knowles Biography". People. Retrieved March 28, 2013.
Lee, Youyoung (June 3, 2013). "Beyoncé, Jay-Z Go On Date in New York, Watch Iron Man 3". HuffPost. Retrieved June 6, 2013.
Bailey, Alyssa (April 6, 2018). "Jay-Z on Overcoming Cheating: Beyoncé 'Knew I'm Not the Worst of What I've Done'". Elle. New York City: Hachette Filipacchi Media. Retrieved May 9, 2018.
Reed, Anika (November 29, 2017). "Jay-Z talks infidelity, confirms a joint album with Beyoncé exists". USA Today. Retrieved May 9, 2018.
"Beyoncé documentary describing 'pain and trauma' of miscarriage airs on BBC – News – TV & Radio". The Independent. Retrieved September 27, 2014.
Mathur, Aditi. "You don't yet know what swag is / But you was made in Paris / And mama woke up the next day / And shot her album package". International Business Times. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
Kaufman, Gil. "Beyoncé Puts 'Love On Top' At VMAs, Reveals Pregnancy". MTV News. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
Mitchell, John (August 30, 2011). "Beyoncé's Album Sees Sales Surge After VMA Performance Of 'Love On Top'". MTV Newsroom. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011.
"Beyoncé pregnancy announcement at MTV VMA's sparks Twitter world record". Guinness World Records. Retrieved March 23, 2013.
Smith, Catharine (August 29, 2011). "Beyoncé Pregnancy: New Twitter Record Set At MTV VMAs". HuffPost. Retrieved August 30, 2011.
"News of Beyoncé's pregnancy grips Google users, US Open, ESPN popular". Yahoo! News (Philippines). September 5, 2011. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013.
Bernstein, Nina (January 9, 2012). "After Beyoncé Gives Birth, Patients Protest Celebrity Security at Lenox Hill Hospital". The New York Times.
Pareles, Jon (April 25, 2016). "Review: Beyoncé Makes 'Lemonade' Out of Marital Strife". The New York Times. Retrieved June 24, 2016.
Sheffield, Rob (April 25, 2016). "Beyonce Lemonade Album Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 1, 2019.
Ott, Kristen (February 2, 2017). "Beyoncé's pregnancy announcement shatters world record for the Most liked image on Instagram". Guinness World Records. Retrieved February 4, 2017.
Harmon, Steph (July 14, 2017). "Beyoncé publishes photo of her twins on Instagram". The Guardian. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
Harris, Kristin. "Here Are The Top 10 Most-Liked Instagram Photos Of 2017". BuzzFeed.com. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
n/a, n/a (August 6, 2018). "Beyonce in Vogue: 'I've been through hell and back'". BBC Newsbeat. Retrieved August 6, 2018.
"Meet Tyler Mitchell, the Photographer Who Shot Beyoncé For Vogue's September Issue". Vogue. Retrieved August 13, 2018.
Vena, Jocelyn. "'At Last': The Story Behind The Song Beyoncé Sang for the Obamas' First Dance". MTV News. Retrieved April 15, 2013.
"Beyoncé and Jay-Z Raise $4 Million for Obama at NYC Event". Rap-Up. September 19, 2012. Retrieved October 27, 2012.
Daunt, Tina (September 18, 2012). "Beyoncé, Jay-Z Raise $4 Million for Obama in New York". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
"I Am". Beyoncé. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
Schwarz, Hunter (May 14, 2015). "Hillary Clinton's got Beyoncé. And that's important". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 3, 2016.
Merica, Dan. "Jay Z, Beyonce headline concert for Clinton". CNN. Retrieved September 26, 2017.
O'Connor, Maureen. "Beyoncé Is a 'Feminist, I Guess'". New York. Retrieved December 13, 2013.
Bury, Liz (December 13, 2013). "Beyoncé samples Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's call to feminism". The Guardian. Retrieved December 14, 2013.
Bennett, Jessica. "How to Reclaim the F-Word? Just Call Beyoncé". Time. Retrieved September 26, 2017.
Weidhase, Nathalie (January 2, 2015). "'Beyoncé feminism' and the contestation of the black feminist body". Celebrity Studies. 6 (1): 128–131. doi:10.1080/19392397.2015.1005389. ISSN 1939-2397.
Sieczkowski, Cavan (May 9, 2014). "Feminist Activist Says Beyonce Is Partly 'Anti-Feminist' And 'Terrorist'". HuffPost. Retrieved May 7, 2019.
Kuo, Lily; Kuo, Lily. "Chimamanda Adichie says Beyonce's kind of feminism isn't her kind of feminism". Quartz Africa. Retrieved May 7, 2019.
"Beware of 'Feminism Lite'". ideas.ted.com. March 7, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2019.
"The reason Beyoncé performed in front of the word 'feminist'". The Independent. April 5, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2019.
Lee, Jolie (May 10, 2014). "Beyoncé, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join 'Ban Bossy' campaign". USA Today. Retrieved October 1, 2014.
Weidhase, N (2015). "'Beyoncé feminism' and the contestation of the black feminist body". Celebrity Studies. 6 (1): 128–131. doi:10.1080/19392397.2015.1005389.
"Beyoncé Gay Marriage: Bey Shows Support For Gay Marriage". Vibe. Retrieved February 27, 2013.
"Beyoncé, citing North Carolina's HB2, urges support for equality".
Monde, Chiderah (July 22, 2013). "Beyoncé posts photo of Daily News cover Trayvon Martin rally". Daily News. New York. Retrieved July 24, 2013.
Bacle, Ariana (May 11, 2016). "Michael Brown's mother talks Lemonade appearance: 'They wanted me to look regal'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 8, 2016.
Gottesman, Tamar (April 4, 2016). "Exclusive: Beyoncé Wants to Change the Conversation". Elle. Retrieved July 8, 2016.
Hazel, Allison (February 24, 2017). "Beyoncé Shows Support for Transgender Students After Trump Withdraws Bathroom Protections". Billboard. Retrieved February 27, 2017.
Mullan, Dillon "Beyoncé thanks Colin Kaepernick for his 'personal sacrifice' while presenting Muhammad Ali Award, The Washington Post, December 6, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
"Beyoncé & Jay-Z Top Earning Couple". MTV News. November 21, 2008. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012.
Rose, Lacey (September 22, 2008). "World's Best-Paid Music Stars". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009.
Rose, Lacey (June 3, 2009). "Inside Beyoncé's Entertainment Empire". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 6, 2009.
Copsey, Robert (October 7, 2010). "GaGa, Beyoncé among most powerful women". Digital Spy. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
Isaac, Cheryl (May 18, 2012). "6 Personal Branding Lessons From Forbes Celebrity 100 Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012.
"Profile: Beyoncé Knowles". Forbes. Retrieved May 20, 2012.
Antunes, Anderson (August 6, 2012). "The World's Highest-Paid Celebrity Couples". Forbes. Retrieved August 12, 2012.
"Beyoncé and Jay-Z Are Guinness Book's 'Power Couple'". Essence. September 20, 2010. Archived from the original on October 27, 2012.
O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (February 1, 2013). "Why Beyoncé Isn't Getting Paid For Her Super Bowl Halftime Gig". Forbes. Retrieved June 30, 2013.
Karmali, Sarah. "Beyoncé and Jay-Z Are Music's First Billionaire Couple". Vogue. Retrieved May 6, 2013.
"The World's Most Powerful Celebrities". Forbes. 2013. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012.
"Beyoncé Set To Become Highest Paid Black Musician". Vibe. February 17, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2014.
"Beyoncé Named Highest-Earning Black Artist Of All Time". MTV. April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014.
Pomerantz, Dorothy (June 30, 2014). "Beyoncé Knowles Tops The FORBES Celebrity 100 List". Forbes. Retrieved July 11, 2014.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (July 11, 2016). "Beyoncé and Jay-Z Are The World's Highest-Paid Celebrity Couple Of 2016". Forbes. Retrieved July 11, 2016.
Robehmed, Natalie (May 17, 2017). "America's Richest Female Celebrities 2017: Oprah, Judge Judy And Beyoncé Rule". Forbes. Retrieved May 17, 2017.
Robehmed, Natalie (June 12, 2017). "Celebrity 100: The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities Of 2017". Forbes. Retrieved June 7, 2017.
O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (May 17, 2017). "Beyoncé and Jay-Z Are Officially A Billion-Dollar Couple". Forbes. Retrieved May 17, 2017.
"Billboard's Top 50 Money Makers of 2016". Billboard. July 13, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017.
"Her Highness". The New Yorker. February 20, 2013. Retrieved February 20, 2013.
Smith, Caspar (November 29, 2009). "Beyoncé: Artist of the Decade". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on November 30, 2009.
Suskind, Alex (November 20, 2019). "Best of the Decade: How Beyoncé defined the last 10 years of music". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 22, 2019.
Luhrmann, Baz (April 18, 2013). "Beyoncé – The 2013 TIME 100". Time. Retrieved April 18, 2013.
Sandberg, Sheryl (April 24, 2014). "Beyoncé". Time. Retrieved April 24, 2014.
Spanos, Brittany (October 17, 2018). "The Millennial 100". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"Adele: 'Beyoncé Has Always Inspired Me'". Capital London. February 14, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2012.
"Exclusive Q&A with Alexis Jordan". J-14. Bauer Publishing. July 21, 2010. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010.
Harris, Kristin. "Ariana Grande's Favorite Artists: Madonna and Beyoncé". Seventeen. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014.
Blasberg, Derek (February 20, 2014). "Grande Dame". V. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved July 13, 2014.
"Azealia Banks: 'I'm Very Inspired by Beyoncé'". Rap-Up. November 13, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2012.
Teen Vogue (June 17, 2018). "Bebe Rexha Creates the Playlist to Her Life – Teen Vogue" – via YouTube.
"Bridgit Mendler On 'Good Luck Charlie,' Music, And The Craziest Thing A Fan Has Asked Her". HuffPost. June 20, 2009. Retrieved March 31, 2013.
"Britney Spears Inspired by Ex-Boyfriend Justin Timberlake, Beyoncé". US Magazine. December 30, 2013. Retrieved May 6, 2017.
"Cheryl Cole Inspired By Beyoncé: She's Such A Beautiful Person". Capital FM. June 14, 2012. Retrieved July 8, 2012.
"Demi Lovato Is Bringing Beyonce Inspired Videos To 'Neon Lights' Tour (Video Clip)". MTV.
Brennan Carley (November 2, 2015). "Ellie Goulding: 'I Was As Influenced By Björk As I Was By Beyoncé'". Spin. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
"Ed Sheeran Reveals The Truth About How He Really Got Beyonce On The 'Perfect' Duet". Capital.
Sanclement, Anna (January 31, 2014). "But aren't we all?".
"Florence Welch: from hustler to headliner". Time Out London. Retrieved January 28, 2017.
Kelefa Sanneh (September 28, 2015). "Pop for Misfits". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 5, 2016.
Elliot, Natalie (February 16, 2012). "Grimes Dishes On Her Less Obvious Influences And Her DIY Tattoos". Archived from the original on February 9, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2012.
"MAMAMOO Hwasa's fierce MAMA look has gone viral in Korea". SBS PopAsia.
"Iggy Azalea's Sexy "Black Widow" Look Was (Partly) Inspired By Beyonce: Find Out How". August 14, 2014.
Varga, George (March 20, 2012). "A chat with local 'Idol' Jessica Sanchez". U-T San Diego. MLIM Holdings. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014.
"Jessie J: Beyonce is inspirational". The Belfast Telegraph.
Fine, Audrey. "Interview with JoJo". Seventeen.com. Archived from the original on September 17, 2010.
Moss, Corey (September 27, 2006). "Kelly Rowland Scraps Sappy Story, Picks Up Snoop". MTV News. Retrieved April 12, 2008.
"Kelly Rowland: Style Icons". Essence. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2012.
"Kendrick Lamar on What He Learned From Beyoncé and Why He Won't Talk About Donald Trump". E! News. August 9, 2017.
"Lady Gaga Recalls Beyoncé's Inspiration in MTV's 'Inside The Outside'". MTV News. Retrieved September 27, 2014.
Ladies, Rep Your. "Little Mix Discuss Authenticity & Why Beyoncé Inspires Them". Fuse.
"New Music To Know: Meghan Trainor Doesn't Care if You're Ready For This Jelly". Radio.com. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2016.
Moran, Jonathan (September 4, 2011). "Former Pussycat Dolls frontwoman Nicole Scherzinger talks about her racy new single and her love for boyfriend Lewis Hamilton". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved September 6, 2011.
"Millie Bobby Brown Shares a Brilliant Amy Winehouse Impersonation" – via YouTube.
"Rihanna advises Idols to work like they have a hit". CablePulse 24.[dead link]
Rowley, Alison (July 8, 2012). "Rita Ora: 'Beyoncé' told me to just be myself'". Digital Spy. Retrieved July 8, 2012.
"You are being redirected..." Theknockturnal.com.
"Interview with Sza: working with Beyoncé, Rhianna, and how to stay present". Live Nation TV. June 9, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2019.[permanent dead link]
Howarth, Alice (May 26, 2014). "Sam Smith on Beyoncé, barn dances and getting the best out of your barman". GQ. Archived from the original on May 28, 2014.
"Tinashe on Creating Her Own Lane". August 12, 2016.
Hasaka, Amanda (January 28, 2014). "Celebrities Who Love Beyoncé". Teen.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2016.
Frehsée, Nicole (December 5, 2011). "White Rabbits Start Road-Testing Beyoncé-Inspired Album". Spin. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012.
Healy, Pat (August 4, 2014). "Sinead O'Connor talks 'Bossy,' Beyonce, sex appeal and Kurt Cobain". Metro.us. Retrieved September 1, 2019.
Mullen, Katelyn (August 4, 2011). "Beyoncé Gushes About Gwyneth Paltrow: 'She Is What I Strive to Be One Day'". HuffPost.
Nudd, Tim (January 31, 2011). "Gwyneth Paltrow: Beyoncé's Talent Is 'Mind-Blowing'". People. Archived from the original on February 1, 2011.
Karlin, Lily (August 29, 2014). "Lena Dunham Posts An 'I Woke Up Like This' Selfie That We Can Actually Relate To". HuffPost.
Moran, Lee (June 19, 2019). "DNC's Anti-Donald Trump 'Boy Bye' Phone Wallpaper Backfires Spectacularly". HuffPost.
Sommers, Kat. "The Rise of the Visual Album: How 'Lemonade' Stacks Up". BBC America. Retrieved November 1, 2019.
Smith, Da'Shan (June 2, 2019). "Surprise Albums: 17 Drops That Shocked The Music World | uDiscover". uDiscover Music. Retrieved November 1, 2019.
"Why Are Female Pop Singers Turning To Rap?". Highsnobiety. March 27, 2018. Retrieved June 22, 2019.
"Beyoncé, The Rapper". Pitchfork. October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2017.
"100 Greatest Songs of '00s". VH1. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2013.
"100 Best Tracks of the 00s – #10-01". NME. Retrieved August 28, 2013.
Horton, Matthew (July 5, 2013). "5 Reasons Why Beyoncé's 'Crazy in Love' Is Still The Best Pop Song of the Century". NME. Archived from the original on July 8, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2013.
Barnett, Laura (January 14, 2009). "Forget Beyoncé's new dance". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 15, 2010.
Kelley, Frannie (November 23, 2009). "The Decade in Music: Beyoncé's 'Single Ladies (Put A Ring On It)' (2009)". NPR. Retrieved December 14, 2011.
Herndon, Jessica (January 1, 2010). "Inside Story: The Making of Beyoncé's 'Single Ladies'". People. Retrieved December 15, 2010.
Misick, Bobbi (June 2, 2010). "Beyoncé's "Single Ladies" Timeline – The single woman's anthem". Essence. Retrieved December 15, 2010.
Markman, Rob. "Drake Shows Beyoncé Love, But Rejects New Friends On New Singles". MTV News. Retrieved April 26, 2013.
Atherton, Ben (January 13, 2012). "CSIRO unveils bootylicious Beyoncé fly". ABC News (Australia). Retrieved January 13, 2012.
"Beyoncé exhibit coming to Rock and Roll Hall of Fame". CBS News. Associated Press. July 18, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014.
Kussin, Zachary (December 27, 2016). "Curvy 'Beyoncé tower' on the rise in Australia". Retrieved August 15, 2017.
"Beyoncé Day Is Now An Official Thing in Minnesota". Time. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
"Beyonce, Jay-Z receive key to Columbia, S.C., have day named in their honor". Wftv.com. August 24, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
Holden, Steve (October 5, 2018). "How Ariana and Beyonce inspired a musical about Henry VIII's wives". BBC. Retrieved May 29, 2019.
Glazer, Eliot. "Behold the Newest Installment of 'Got 2 B Real,' a Web Series That Dubs Over the Voices of R&B Goddesses". Vulture.
Ennis, Dawn. "Lesbian icons honored with jerseys worn by USWNT". Outsports.com. Retrieved March 4, 2019.
"'Beyoncé' album review: More than the delivery is a surprise". Chicago Tribune. December 14, 2013. Retrieved March 7, 2015.
"According to Nielsen SoundScan, A Breakdown of Beyoncé's US & Worldwide Album Sales". HuffPost. November 14, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016.
Caulfield, Keith (December 30, 2015). "Beyoncé's 'Dangerously in Love' Surpasses 5 Million Sold in U.S." Billboard. Retrieved December 30, 2015.
"There's one huge difference between Madonna and Beyoncé". Quartz. Retrieved January 29, 2016.
Grein, Paul (February 6, 2014). "Chart Watch: Oh Lorde Is She Hot". Yahoo! Music. Retrieved February 6, 2014.
"The 50 people who matter today: 41–50". New Statesman. September 24, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009.
Pedersen, Erik (February 17, 2010). "Beyoncé Tops Decade's RIAA Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011.
Lamy Johnathan; Cara Duckworth; Liz Kennedy (February 17, 2010). "RIAA Tallies the Decade's Top Gold and Platinum Award Winners". Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Archived from the original on February 21, 2010.
Trust, Gary (May 28, 2010). "Ask Billboard: Beyoncé Vs. Gaga Vs. Rihanna". Billboard. Retrieved August 13, 2010.
"Artists of the Decade Music Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 20, 2012.
"The Top 50 R&B/Hip Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years". Billboard. p. 4. Retrieved September 23, 2011.
Graham, Mark (February 13, 2012). "VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music (Complete List)". VH1. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012.
Shriver, Jerry (February 1, 2010). "One fierce night for Beyoncé, Swift and Gaga at the Grammys". USA Today. Retrieved August 13, 2010.
"Past Winners Search – Beyoncé". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Retrieved March 8, 2011.
Renshaw, David (December 6, 2016). "Beyoncé Is Now The Most-Nominated Woman Artist in Grammy History". The Fader. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
"And The GRAMMY Went To ... Adele". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States. Retrieved April 30, 2013.
"Beyoncé Wins Big at BET Awards". Rap-Up. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
Hosking, Patrick; Wighton, David (December 15, 2006). "Nominees for the 2007 Golden Globe Awards in full". The Times. London. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007.
"President, Celebrities Announce 38th NAACP Image Award Nominees" (Press release). National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010. Retrieved October 24, 2012.
"Film critics honour The Departed". BBC. January 13, 2007. Retrieved May 20, 2013.
"100 MOST AWARD-WINNING ARTISTS: DRAKE, XTINA, MACKLEMORE & MORE". fuse. Fuse Networks, LLC. March 10, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2016.
"100 Most Award-Winning Artists". Fuse. Retrieved October 8, 2016.
"Beyoncé's Lemonade among Peabody Award winners for Entertainment". Entertainment Weekly. April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017.
"Margaret Thatcher tops Woman's Hour Power List", BBC News (Arts & Entertainment), December 14, 2016.
"Beyoncé". Music World Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
Buchanan, Jason. "Cadillac Records (2008)". AllMovie. AllRovi. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved April 7, 2012.
Ives, Nat (December 18, 2002). "Pepsi Switches To a New Voice Of a Generation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012.
"Britney, Beyoncé, Pink star in Pepsi ad". USA Today. January 27, 2004. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012.
Sisario, Ben (December 9, 2012). "In Beyoncé Deal, Pepsi Focuses on Collaboration". The New York Times. Retrieved December 11, 2012.
Arumugam, Nadia (January 20, 2013). "White House Removes Petition Demanding Pepsi Spokesperson Beyoncé Ousted From Inauguration Lineup". Forbes. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
"Pepsi/Beyoncé and Chanel/Brad Pitt Battle for Most Celebrity Spokesperson Chatter: NetBase Evaluates Endorsement Buzz Winners". Market Wired. April 10, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2013.
Jessen, Monique & Stephen Silverman (June 22, 2004). "Beyoncé Launches New True Star Fragrance". People. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007.
"For The Record: Quick News On Britney Spears, Kevin Federline, Paris Hilton, Beyoncé, Beanie Sigel, Madonna & More". MTV News. November 9, 2005. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
"Beyoncé stars in new fragrance campaign". USA Today. August 8, 2007. Archived from the original on February 8, 2009.
"Beyoncé Launches Her First Fragrance: Beyoncé Heat". People. December 18, 2009. Archived from the original on December 19, 2009. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
Poulter, Sean (November 18, 2010). "Beyoncé's Heat perfume advertisement deemed too sexy for UK daytime TV". Herald Sun. Retrieved January 11, 2011.
"Beyoncé's scents have Jay-Z's approval". The Indian Express. March 7, 2011. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012.
"Coty Beauty Introduces Beyoncé Pulse" (Press release). Coty Beauty. June 16, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
Carter, Holly (August 8, 2013). "Beyoncé Has the No. 1 Selling Celebrity Fragrance Line – Let's Have a Dance Party!". People. Archived from the original on August 11, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013.
Naughton, Julie (August 9, 2013). "Beyoncé Wraps Tour With Scent Success". Women's Wear Daily. Fairchild Fashion Media. Retrieved October 9, 2013. (subscription required)
Michaels, Sean (April 28, 2011). "Beyoncé sued for $100m by video game developer". The Guardian. London. Retrieved May 6, 2011.
"Beyoncé Knowles settles with gaming company". Retrieved May 15, 2013.[dead link]
Totilo, Stephen (March 19, 2009). "Beyoncé Promotes Nintendo Game, Admits Weakness For 'Super Mario'". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Mitchell, Gail (October 2, 2009). "Beyoncé: The Billboard Q&A". Billboard. Retrieved October 8, 2009.
"Jay-Z Buys the Music Streaming Firm, Aspiro". The New York Times. March 13, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015.
Flanagan, Andrew (March 30, 2015). "It's Official: Jay-Z's Historic Tidal Launches With 16 Artist Stakeholders". Billboard. Retrieved March 31, 2015.
Sisario, Ben (March 30, 2015). "Jay-Z Reveals Plans for Tidal, a Streaming Music Service". The New York Times. Retrieved March 31, 2015.
"Beyoncé Fashion Diva Hits the Runway as the Most Stylish Game for Phones" (Press release). Business Wire. January 15, 2008. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012.
Silverman, Stephen (November 16, 2005). "Beyoncé Unveils Her New Fashion Line". People. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007.
"Celebrity fashion labels: The good, the bad and the ugly". CNN. September 26, 2011. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
Adenitire, Adenike (June 8, 2005). "Destiny's Child Put on a Fashion Show at U.K. Concert". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Moss, Corey (April 12, 2005). "Beyoncé In Talks For Potential 'Dream' Film Role". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011.
Butler, Meredith (August 15, 2005). "Rancho Bernardo company teams with singer". North Country Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012.
Kaplan, Julee (July 1, 2009). "Beyoncé and Tina Knowles Launch Sasha Fierce". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011.
"Dereon by Beyoncé for C&A". Fashionlooks.com. June 29, 2010. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved January 11, 2011.
Alter, Charlotte (October 27, 2014). "Beyoncé Launching Athletic Brand With Topshop". Time. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
Adamczyk, Alicia (October 27, 2014). "Beyoncé To Launch Activewear Brand With Topshop". Forbes. Retrieved October 30, 2014.
"Beyoncé talks about her athleisure brand Ivy Park and the pressure to be perfect". The Telegraph. April 6, 2016. Retrieved February 26, 2017.
"Beyoncé buys Ivy Park stake from Topshop owner accused of sexual harassment and racial abuse". Mic.com. Retrieved December 24, 2018.
"Beyoncé's Ivy Park Cuts Ties With Topshop Amid Allegations". Time. Retrieved December 24, 2018.
Pfanner, Eric; Bhasin, Kim (April 4, 2019). "Beyonce Teams Up With Adidas to Sell Shoes and Clothes". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved April 27, 2019.
"Beyonce Details Upcoming IVY PARK Collection Set For January 2020 Release". Billboard.
"Beyoncé Knowles's Ivy Park x Adidas Collaboration". POPSUGAR Fashion.
"Beyoncé on Motherhood, Self-Care, and Her Quest For Purpose - Beyoncé launches IVY PARK x adidas". Elle.
"The Survivor Foundation Established by Knowles and Rowland Families to Provide Transitional Housing for Hurricane Evacuees". Business Wire. 2005. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
"Philanthropy". Music World. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
Vena, Jocelyn (October 15, 2008). "Beyoncé's Survivor Foundation Helps Hurricane Ike Victims". MTV Newsroom. Archived from the original on October 17, 2008.
"Beyoncé Added to Haiti Telethon". Rap-Up. January 20, 2010. Retrieved April 7, 2010.
Daly, Bridget (February 10, 2010). "Beyoncé Named Face of Fashion for Haiti T-Shirt". Holly Scoop. Archived from the original on November 12, 2011.
"CFDA". cfda.com.
Conley, Mikaela (April 29, 2011). "Beyoncé Joins Michelle Obama's Initiative To Fight Childhood Obesity". ABC. Archived from the original on May 2, 2011.
"Beyoncé Wants You to "Move Your Body"". Rap-Up. April 8, 2011. Retrieved April 9, 2011.
Martin, Dan (May 6, 2011). "Beyoncé debuts charity single God Bless the USA". The Guardian. London. Retrieved May 6, 2011.
"About Mayors Against Illegal Guns". demandaction.org. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
"Gun Control: Celebrities 'Demand a Plan'". Sky News. December 22, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2013.
Hart, Tina (August 20, 2012). "Beyoncé helps break 1bn social media milestone for World Humanitarian Day". Music Week. Retrieved August 22, 2012.
"World Humanitarian Day – 19 August". Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012.
Karmali, Sarah (February 28, 2013). "Beyoncé Leads New Gucci Empowerment Campaign". Vogue. Retrieved March 12, 2013.
Talarico, Brittany (April 17, 2013). "Katy Perry, Blake Lively Join Beyoncé and Gucci to Empower Women". People. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2013.
"Line Up". Chime for Change. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2013.
McKnight, Jenni (April 8, 2013). "Beyoncé reveals her biggest inspiration is her mother as she sees the 'best qualities' in everybody". Metro News. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
"Cameron Diaz, Evan Rachel Wood, Florence Welch, Freida Pinto, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jada Pinkett Smith, John Legend, Julia Roberts, Kylie Minogue, Olivia Wilde, Ziggy Marley And Zoe Saldana Join Chime For Change Co Founders Beyoncé Knowles – Carter, Frida Giannini And Salma Hayek Pinault To Celebrate The Most Inspirational Girls And Women in Their Lives" (PDF). Chime For Change. London, UK. May 15, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 25, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
"About: Miss A Meal". Miss A Meal. Retrieved April 15, 2013.
"Beyoncé is Lending Her Voice for GOOD". Reuters. April 15, 2013. Archived from the original on June 22, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2013.
"charitybuzz". Beyonce.com. April 15, 2013. Archived from the original on April 20, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2013.

    "See Which Star Was Named Most Charitable Celeb of 2016". Retrieved August 15, 2017.

Beyoncé was born & raised in Houston, Texas. Her mom, Tina Lawson designs their glittering costumes & her dad, Mathew Knowles manages Destiny's Child. Solange, her sister (they're 4 years apart) has released her debut album. She dances with her big sister during DC-3 concerts. Beyoncé's of Louisiana Creole & African descent.

She and her group were discovered by Whitney Houston. One of her favorite songs is "Lovefool" by The Cardigans. Her favorite item of clothing is a pair of path work metallic boots. She writes & produces many of the group's songs, including smash hits "Jumpin Jumpin", "Bootylicious", "Nasty Girl", "Independent Women", "Happy Face" and "Apple Pie a la mode".

- IMDb Mini Biography By: Tee
Spouse (1)
Jay-Z 	(4 April 2008 - present) ( 3 children)
Trade Mark (4)
Large, heavy earrings
Often wears bodysuits when performing
Often wears stiletto heels
Mezzo-soprano vocals
Trivia (108)
Lead singer of the singing group Destiny's Child.
Toured with Christina Aguilera as her opening act (2000).
Toured with TLC as their opening act (1999).
Has a cat named Master P
Attended the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts in Houston, Texas.
Solange's big sister and Nixon & Koi Knowles' older half-sister.
Once appeared on Star Search (1983).
In 2001, she became the first African-American woman to ever win the ASCAP Pop Songwriter of the Year Award.
Is a huge fan of Middle Eastern music and dance.
Her biggest hit to date is song "Crazy in Love" (2003).
The Radio Music Awards, MTV Europe Video Music Awards and Billboard Awards are among the awards shows she has performed on in 2003. She also performed at a South African AIDS benefit show in November 2003, organized by Bono of U2 to combat the AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa.
(February 8, 2004) Won five Grammy Awards, including Best Contemporary R&B Album for "Dangerously in Love", she took home the most awards for this year's (2004) show.
Her mom, Tina has Louisiana Creole (African, Native American, French, and smaller amounts of Irish and Spanish) ancestry & her dad, Mathew has African-American ancestry.
Has been quoted as saying that to get over her shyness she developed a stage persona named "Sasha".
Was voted number 1 on VH1's 100 Hottest Hotties
Her favorite rapper is Wyclef Jean.
She and Jay-Z are buying a house in Miami as well as in London, England.
Tina Lawson & Mathew Knowles' oldest daughter.
Ranked #7 in Stuff magazine's "102 Sexiest Women in the World" (2002).
Julez Smith's aunt.
Ex-sister-in-law of college football player, Daniel Smith.
Beyoncé was named after her mom's maiden name, Beyincé.
Attended Welch Middle School in Houston, Texas.
Sang three of the five Oscar-nominated songs at The 77th Annual Academy Awards (2005), including one completely in French (2005).
One of People magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People in the World" for most wanted lips (2004).
(June 13, 2005) She and the other members of Destiny's Child announced that they will disband after their tour ends in the fall.
Ranked #1 on E!'s 50 Steamiest Southern Stars
Along with Nicole Richie, Veronica Webb, Kelly Osbourne, Angie Everhart, Alexandra Richards, Irina Pantaeva, Marisa Miller, Wyclef Jean, Rachel Hunter, Naomi Campbell and Janice Dickinson, she participated in the "Fashion for Relief" show on September 16, 2005 in New York, a benefit for AmeriCares to support victims for Hurricane Katrina. Gwen Stefani and Gavin Rossdale were among the celebrities who attended.
Attended the same high school Seattle Supersonic Rashard Lewis attended.
Launched a clothing line, "House of Dereon", with her mother, Tina Lawson, in 2005. The name, Dereon, is Tina's mother's maiden name.
Named #17 on Maxim magazine's Hot 100 Women of 2005 list.
Has known R&B singer Alicia Keys since she was 14.
(March 28, 2006) Along with her Destiny's Child members, she and they were honored with a star on Hollywood's Walk of Fame.
Is a huge fan of Aishwarya Rai Bachchan.
Ranked #17 in FHM magazine's "100 Sexiest Women in the World 2005" special supplement.
Was featured as #3 on Maxim magazine's Hot 100 Women of 2002 supplement.
She and her then-boyfriend Jay-Z own 3 apartments at South Beach in Miami.
Studied acting with Ivana Chubbuck.
Among the guests at her 25th birthday were Sean 'Diddy' Combs, Nicole Richie, Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams.
Named #18 in FHM magazine's "100 Sexiest Women in the World 2006" supplement.
First female artist to reach number one position on both singles and albums chart simultaneously in the United States and the United Kingdom (2003).
Won Best International Female Solo Artist, Brit Awards (2004).
Was officially in the BAFTA longlist (Equivalently, the semi-finals) for Best Actress in a Leading Role, for her role in Dreamgirls (2006), which consisted of 15 finalists for each category (except Animated Film). However, she was eliminated in the next round, which the five official nominees were selected (2007).
Beyoncé and Shakira are collaborating on a song called "Beautiful Liar". The song will appear on a special-edition reissue of Beyoncé's solo album, "B'Day".
Ranked #13 on Maxim magazine's Hot 100 Women of 2007 list.
Ranked #16 on VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists.
Winner of the Gold Media Prize, BRAVO Supershow, Germany (2007).
Best friends with Kelly Rowland since they were children.
Good friends with Gwyneth Paltrow, Mariah Carey, and Rihanna.
Was featured on the "Most Overrated of 2006" list.
Ranked #14 on Maxim magazine's Hot 100 Women of 2008 list.
Ranked #4 in the 2008 Forbes The Celebrity 100 list.
The Brazilian electro-pop/rock group CSS, famous for their song "Music is My Hot, Hot Sex" used in an Apple commercial, took their name from a reported quote from 'Beyonce' in which she stated she was tired of being sexy. Cansei de Ser Sexy is Brazilian Portuguese literally meaning "tired of being sexy".
Won Best International Female Artist, NRJ Radio Awards, Europe (2004).
Nominated twice for International Female Artist of the Year (2007 and 2009), NRJ Music Awards, France.
Before her trio became Destiny's Child they were known as Girls Tyme.
Mother Tina Lawson used to run a hair salon.
She and Destiny's Child were awarded a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Recording at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood, California.
Chosen by American music-magazine, "Billboard", as Woman of the Year (2009).
Won three awards for Best Female Artist, Best Song (for "Halo") and Best Video (for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)"). She won the most awards at the 2009 ceremony. She was also nominated for Best Live Act. MTV Europe Music Awards (2009).
Nominated for International Album of the Year (for "I Am... Sasha Fierce"), NRJ Music Awards, France (2010).
Winner of "World's Greatest Popstars" season, voted by the public - T4/4Music, United Kingdom (2009).
The gold and diamond nail rings for the music video "Sweet Dreams" is valued at $36,000. It was made by Bijules designer, Jules Kim.
According to a television interview with Steve Jones for Beyonce: For the Record (2009), Beyoncé said the music video for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)" was the cheapest video made, of all her singles released. This was because most of the budget was used for the single "If I Were a Boy".
Received NRJ Award of Honor, NRJ Music Awards, France (2010).
In 2010, she launched her new fragrance "Heat" at Macy's in Manhattan. On the TV commercial for the fragrance, Beyoncé sang "Fever", a song most popularized by Peggy Lee.
Her victory at the 52nd annual Grammy Awards (January 31, 2010) set a record for a female artist: six Grammy wins in a single year, including Song of the Year (for "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)"), Best Female Pop Vocal Performance (for "Halo"), Best Female R&B Vocal Performance, Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance, Best R&B Song and Best Contemporary R&B Album (for "I Am... Sasha Fierce").
(January 20, 2009) Sang "At Last" (immortalized by Etta James) at the first presidential inaugural ball as Barack Obama and Michelle Obama danced cheek-to-cheek. Other featured artists in the venue included, Stevie Wonder, Jay-Z, Sting, Alicia Keys, Mariah Carey, Faith Hill, Maroon 5's Adam Levine, etc.
In her song "Get Me Bodied" from her album "B'Day, she says four numbers at the start of her song, 9,4,8 and 1. These numbers are her birth date. The 4th of September (9th month) and 8 and 1 because she was born in 1981.
At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards she won the Video of the Year award and allowed Taylor Swift to finish her acceptance speech for Best Female Video after Kanye West interrupted her.
First started singing in the church choir at St. John's Church in downtown Houston, Texas. Has been a lifelong member of (and contributor to) the church.
Formed the Survivors' Foundation for survivors of Hurricane Katrina.
Was a tomboy and refused to wear dresses when she was younger.
One of Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in the World (2013).
Beyoncé and Jay-Z were one of the main headliners at the Prince's Urban Trust. [April 2004]
New York City: "Four Intimate Nights" of sold-out performances at Manhattan's Roseland Ballroom. [August 2011]
One of Time magazine's Most Influential People in the World. [April 2014]
Was born on a Friday at 10:00 AM CST.
Ranked #21 on Maxim magazine's Hot 100 Women of 2014 list.
Step-daughter of Richard Lawson. Step-sister of Bianca Lawson.
She would have been the first female act to headline Coachella since Björk in 2007.
Canceled her performance at Coachella because of her pregnancy[February 2017].
Idol of Asia Monet Ray.
As of Sept 2016, she has 85.3 million Instagram Followers,.
Performed her songs "Love Drought" and "Sandcastles" at the 2016 Grammy Awards.
Will headline the Coachella festival in 2018.
Most nominated woman in Grammys history.
In 1989 sang in a junior talent contest.
AskMen.com Sexiest Woman of the Decade from 2000-2010.
Named People's Most Beautiful Woman in the World in 2012.
Most awarded artist at the BET and MTV Music Awards.
Was the only non-supermodel to cover Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Edition until MMA fighter Ronda Rousey.
Named the Sexiest Woman of the Century by GQ Magazine.
AskMen.com Sexiest Woman in 2007.
Has 3 children: daughter, Blue Ivy Carter (b. January 7, 2012) and daughter, Rumi Carter & son, Sir Carter (b. June 13, 2017) with husband, Jay-Z.
Her cat Master P is named after the rapper Master P.
Owner of Parkwood Entertainment.
Attended St. Mary's Montessori School in Houston, where she enrolled in dance classes.
Attended Alief Elsik High School in Houston.
Musical influences include Michael Jackson, Diana Ross, Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Tina Turner, Aaliyah, Prince, Lauryn Hill, Sade, Donna Summer, Mary J. Blige, Janet Jackson, Anita Baker, and Rachelle Ferrell.
In fall of 1990, she enrolled in Parker Elementary School, a music magnet school in Houston, where she would perform with the school's choir.
Her fans are affectionately known as "The Beyhive".
Admires Tejano singer Selena and credits Selena's Spanish-language albums as helping her with pronunciation on her Spanish-language recordings.
Loves dancing to salsa and merengue music.
According to Fuse in 2014, she is the second most awarded recording artist of all time, only behind Michael Jackson.
Is mentioned by name in 50 Cent's 2004 "Respect It or Check It" hip-hop track.
Wore a Galia Lahav wedding dress to renew her vows.
Sister-in-law of music video director, Alan Ferguson.
Personal Quotes (26)
There's plenty of days when I'm like "Oh God, why?". But that's just life. It's every job, not just mine. Every moment is not perfect. But it's definitely more good times than bad. You can't even compare. And when I'm on stage it feels incredible. There are certain nights that you know you hit that crazy note and you know that spin spinned extra fast. And you look out and people are just into it and you've worked so hard and now it's paying off and you can see why you dedicated your life to this.
[on comparisons to J-Lo] It doesn't annoy me, no, because I respect J-Lo. I like her, I think she's great. And I know that I'm over a decade younger than her, it's so flattering that I'm so young and people are comparing me to someone who has accomplished so much. But I don't think I'm like anyone else and really, I'd rather not be compared to anyone else.
[on her song "Bootylicious"] I wrote that because, at the time, I'd gained some weight and the pressure that people put you under, the pressure to be thin, is unbelievable. I was just 18 and you shouldn't be thinking about that. You should be thinking about building up your character and having fun and the song was just telling everyone just forget what people are saying, you're bootylicious. That's all. It's a celebration of curves and a celebration of women's bodies.
Who I am on stage is very, very different to who I am in real life. But I don't see that having a sexy image when you are on stage means that you don't love God. No one knows what I'm really like from that. I like to walk around with bare feet and I don't like to comb my hair. I'm always so glammed up and so diva on stage and that's what they see. People don't understand that... No one knows my personal relationship with God and it's not up to me to prove that to anyone.
For me, it's about the way I carry myself and the way I treat other people. My relationship and how I feel about God and what He does for me, is something deeply personal. It's where I came from, my family, I was brought up in a religious household and that's very important to me. But I understand the mentality of people. I know that people judge others based on certain things. I know how celebrities really are. I've done it too. You meet people - rock stars, rappers, whoever - who you have seen on television and you go into their homes and they are regular people, just like everyone else.
[When asked about the disbanding of Destiny's Child] Not because one person wants to go solo. Or not because we don't like each other. Or because we're not selling records anymore. But because it has to end at a certain point. (June 2005)
We all have our imperfections. But I'm human and you know, it's important to concentrate on other qualities besides outer beauty.
One of the things that kept me out of trouble was doing something creative - creativity can't be judged.
On Bollywood cinema: I'm a fan of a few Bollywood films. I have seen Devdas (2002) and Lagaan: Once Upon a Time in India (2001), both great films. I loved Devdas (2002) - the actress was amazing! I cried towards the end of the film. Indian films are very colorful. It can be fun to do a film like that at least once. Given a chance, I'd love to do an Indian film. (December 2004)
On her religious faith and the categorizing of gay society: Well, you know, I grew up going to church, but I was raised by my uncle who passed away with AIDS a couple of years ago. He was my mother's best friend. And my mother's cousin. He brought me to school every day. He helped me buy my prom dress. He made my clothes with my mother. He was like my nanny. He was my favorite person in the world. And you know, I never really mixed Christianity with how I felt about him. I am about faith and spirituality more so than religion. Doing right by others and not judging.
If I weren't performing, I'd be a beauty editor or a therapist. I love creativity, but I also love to help others. My mother was a hairstylist, and they listen to everyone's problems - like a beauty therapist!
When I sing a song, I definitely have the image for the video in my mind. I kind of hear the choreography that will be in the video, and I can see how I'll look, even before anyone--the record company, the director--has heard the song.
I discovered after going to music festivals that I am a rock fan. I love the guitars, the phrasing, and the abandon of rock fans. You may be shocked to know that I love Peter Gabriel. His voice is so pure. Listen to In Your Eyes.
I'm like everyone else. I have days when I look in the mirror and I'm like "Oh my gosh, I wish I could change this or that." The more you mature, you realize that this imperfections make your more beautiful.
[on what helps to animate her act] I'm like "Please piss me off before the performance.".
I don't like to gamble, but if there's one thing I'm willing to bet on, it's myself.
If you live your life with kindness and give other people great energy, that beauty and great energy come back to you.
Not everyone is supposed to be the same. Be healthy and take care of yourself - and be happy with the beautiful things that made you.
[Mike Myers, her costar in Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002), recalls this rare reminder of her youth. "I mentioned that it would be good to mash together "Baby Boy" and "The Ocean", by Led Zeppelin."] Who's Led Zeppelin?
[on hurricane Harvey and hurricane Irma] Just when you think it couldn't possibly get worse, natural disasters take take precious life, do massive damage, and forever change lives, leaving behind contaminated water, flooded hospitals, schools, and nursing homes and countless families are now homeless. Natural disasters don't discriminate. They don't see if you're an immigrant, black or white, Hispanic or Asian, Jewish or Muslim, wealthy or poor. It doesn't matter if you're from Houston neighborhoods Third Ward or River Oaks, we're all in this together
it's impossible to watch the news without seeing violence or racism in this country.
[on singing in Spanish] I grew up in Texas and one of my good friends from there is Mexican and she was so excited when she heard that I was doing songs in Spanish. She turned me on to Selena's album when I was growing up and I listened to it all the time. At the time, I wasn't too familiar with Spanish speaking artists. A lot of my fans are Hispanic and they've always told me, 'you should sing something in Spanish' but I don't speak Spanish at all. I took it in school but I don't speak it at all but I thought let me give this a try.
[on meeting with the Tejano singer Selena] I did actually meet Selena in the Galleria Mall in Houston, but I didn't say much to her because I wasn't a celebrity. I just saw her and said hello and kept it moving. Definitely growing up in Texas, I heard her on the radio. I think listening to her album - even though I didn't know exactly what she was saying - it helped me in the studio with my pronunciation. I think she is a legend. I admire her. She was so talented.
[on admiring the Latino culture and her Latino fans] I would thank them for embracing me. I did radio (promotions) this morning for hours and hours and I noticed a big difference between speaking to all of the Latino stations and speaking to the pop stations or the other stations. With the Latino stations, there was so much love and everyone is so genuine. I'm just jealous that I wasn't born Latina. I wish I had been because the culture is so beautiful. I'm very grateful Latinos are embracing me.
[on Jennifer Lopez, Selena, and Shakira] Jennifer Lopez, I completely admire her story of growing up in the Bronx and the success that she's had and the empire she's created. She's a very intelligent woman. I got a chance to work with her on the Pepsi commercial. She's unbelievably beautiful and talented. Of course. Selena. Growing up in Texas, hearing about her all time. I've actually performed at rodeos. I know she did that a lot. And she's close to me because of where I'm from. I've also admired Shakira. We just did a song called "Beautiful Liar" and I just think that her dancing and her singing is a very unique style. But more important, she's the nicest most humble woman I've ever worked with. I think the great thing about our duet is that we're at a great point in our careers, we're both in our prime and we worked together and it was nothing but positive and effortless. It just seemed like we were long lost sisters. We looked alike and did certain things alike in that video. It's so weird because we grew up on different sides of the world.
[on connecting with the Latino culture] I feel connected for one because family is very important to me and I know it's important to all my Latino fans and just the heart and the rhythm of the music and the drums and the spiciness it reminds me of Creole. It reminds me of my heritage and where I come from.

#@#@#Jackson#@#@#
Michael Jackson was a multi-talented musical entertainer who enjoyed a chart-topping career both with the Jackson 5 and as a solo artist. 
He released one of the best-selling albums in history, 'Thriller,' in 1982, and had other number-one hits on 'Bad' and 'Off the Wall.' 
He died in 2009 at the age of 50 of a drug overdose.
Known as the "King of Pop," Michael Joseph Jackson was a best-selling American singer, songwriter and dancer. 
As a child, Michael Jackson became the lead singer of his family's popular Motown group, the Jackson 5. 
Michael Jackson went on to a solo career of astonishing worldwide success, delivering No. 1 hits from the albums Off the Wall, Thriller and Bad. 
Michael Jackson died in 2009 at age 50 of a drug overdose just before launching a comeback tour. 
Michael Jackson’s mother, Katherine Jackson, was a homemaker and a devout Jehovah's Witness. 
Michael Jackson’s father, Joseph Jackson, had been a guitarist who put aside his musical aspirations to provide for his family as a crane operator. 
Behind the scenes, Joseph pushed his sons to succeed. 
He was also reportedly known to become violent with them.
Michael Jackson was one of 10 children; nine Jackson siblings, including Rebbie, Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, La Toya, Marlon, Randy and Janet, all made marks in the music industry.
Michael Jackson was born on August 29, 1958, in Gary, Indiana. 
Under his father's encouragement, Michael Jackson’s career in music began at the age of 5.
Joseph believed his sons had talent and molded them into a musical group in the early 1960s that would later become known as the Jackson 5. 
At first, the Jackson Family performers consisted of Michael Jackson's older brothers, Tito, Jermaine and Jackie. 
Michael Jackson joined his siblings when he was five years old, and emerged as the group's lead vocalist. 
Michael Jackson showed remarkable range and depth for such a young performer, impressing audiences with his ability to convey complex emotions. 
Michael Jackson and his brothers spent endless hours rehearsing and polishing their act. At first, the Jackson 5 played local gigs and built a strong following. 
The Jackson 5 moved on to working as the opening act for such R&B artists as Gladys Knight and the Pips, James Brown, and Sam and Dave. 
Impressed by the group, Gordy signed them to his label in early 1969.
Michael Jackson and his brothers moved to Los Angeles, where they lived with Gordy and with Diana Ross of the Supremes as they got settled. 
The Jackson 5 was introduced to the music industry at a special event in August 1969, and the group later opened for the Supremes. 
Their first album, Diana Ross Presents the Jackson 5, hit the charts in December 1969, with its single, "I Want You Back," reaching No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart shortly afterward.
More chart-topping singles quickly followed, such as "ABC," "The Love You Save" and "I'll Be There."
For several years, Michael Jackson and the Jackson 5 maintained a busy tour and recording schedule, under the supervision of Berry Gordy and his Motown staff. 
Michael Jackson’s group became so popular that they even had their own self-titled cartoon show, which ran from 1971 to 1972. 
At the same time, Michael Jackson launched his solo career. 
Despite Michael Jackson’s group's great success, there was trouble brewing behind the scenes.
Tensions mounted between Gordy and Joseph Jackson over the management of his children's careers, with the Jacksons wanting more creative control over their material. 
The group officially severed ties with Motown in 1976, though Jermaine Jackson remained with the label to pursue his solo career.
The overwhelmingly positive response to the new group, Jackson's 1979 solo album Off the Wall helped them. 
Triumph (1980) sold more than 1 million copies, and the brothers went on an extensive tour to support the recording. 
At the same time, Michael Jackson continued exploring more ways to branch out on his own.
In 1983, Michael Jackson embarked on his final tour with his brothers to support the album Victory. 
The one major hit from the recording was Michael Jackson’s duet with Mick Jagger, "State of Shock."
Released in 1982, Michael Jackson’s sixth solo album Thriller is the best-selling album in history, generating seven Top 10 hits. 
The album stayed on the charts for 80 weeks, holding the No. 1 spot for 37 weeks. 
In addition to its unparalleled commercial achievements, Michael Jackson’s Thriller garnered 12 Grammy Award nominations and notched eight wins, both records. 
Michael Jackson’s victories showcased the diverse nature of his work. 
For Michael Jackson’s songwriting talents, he earned a Grammy (best rhythm and blues song) for "Billie Jean." 
Michael Jackson was honored for the singles "Thriller" (best pop vocal performance, male) and "Beat It" (best rock vocal performance, male). 
With co-producer Quincy Jones, Michael Jackson shared the award for album of the year.
Paul McCartney also teamed up with Michael Jackson for a 1982 duet, "The Girl Is Mine," which nearly reached the top of the pop charts. 
On a 1983 television special honoring Motown, Michael Jackson performed his No. 1 hit "Billie Jean" and debuted his soon-to-be-famous dance move, the Moonwalk. 
Michael Jackson, a veteran performer by this time, created this step himself and choreographed the dance sequences for the video of the album's other No. 1 hit, "Beat It."
In 1985, Michael Jackson showed his altruistic side by co-writing "We Are the World," a charity single for USA for Africa. 
Michael Jackson’s album Bad (1987), released as a follow-up to Thriller, reached the top of the charts, with a record five No. 1 hits, including "Man in the Mirror," "The Way You Make Me Feel" and the title track, which was supported by a video directed by Martin Scorsese. 
Michael Jackson spent more than a year on the road, playing concerts to promote the album.
While highly successful, Bad was unable to duplicate the phenomenal sales of Thriller.
In December 2010, the posthumous album Michael was released amid controversy about whether the singer actually performed some of the tracks. 
Another posthumous album, Xscape, was released in May 2014. 
R&B star and Michael Jackson protege Usher performed its first single, "Love Never Felt So Good," that month at the iHeartRadio Music Awards. 
The album, which includes eight songs recorded by Michael Jackson between 1983 and 1999, debuted at No. 2 on Billboard's Top 200 Album chart.
In August 1994, Michael Jackson announced that he had married Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of rock icon Elvis Presley. 
The couple gave a joint television interview with Diane Sawyer, but the union proved to be short-lived. 
They divorced in 1996. 
Some thought that the marriage was a publicity ploy to restore Michael Jackson’s image after child molestation allegations. 
Later that same year, Michael Jackson wed nurse Debbie Rowe. 
The couple divorced in 1999.
Michael Jackson and Rowe had two children through artificial insemination: Son Michael Joseph "Prince" Jackson Jr., born in 1997, and daughter Paris Michael Katherine Jackson, born in 1998.
When Rowe and Jackson divorced, Michael Jackson received full custody of their two children.
Michael Jackson would go on to have a third child, Prince Michael "Blanket" Jackson II, with an unknown surrogate.
After Michael Jackson’s death in June 2009, his children were placed in the care of their grandmother, Katherine Jackson, as dictated in his will. 
In respect to their father's wishes, Prince, Paris and Blanket were largely kept out of the limelight. 
They stepped up to the mic in 2009 to speak to fans at their Michael Jackson’s funeral, and again in January 2010 to accept a posthumous Lifetime Achievement Award for Michael Jackson at the Grammys.
In the 1980s, Michael Jackson created a Southern California ranch called Neverland, a fantasy retreat for a shy and quiet performer who never was truly comfortable with media attention and rarely gave interviews. 
At the 2,700-acre property, Michael Jackson kept exotic pets, such as a chimpanzee named Bubbles. 
Michael Jackson also installed amusement park-type rides and sometimes opened up the ranch for children's events. 
The home features six bedrooms, a pool house, three guest homes and a four-acre lake.
Michael Jackson was badly injured while filming a commercial for PepsiCo in 1984, suffering burns to his face and scalp. 
At the top of his game creatively and commercially, Michael Jackson had signed a $5 million endorsement deal with the soda giant the previous year. 
Michael Jackson had surgery to repair his injuries and is believed to have begun experimenting with plastic surgery around this time. 
Michael Jackson’s face, especially his nose, would become dramatically altered in the coming years.
Around the late 1980s, rumors began swirling that Michael Jackson was lightening the color of his skin to appear more white and sleeping in a special chamber to increase his lifespan. 
In 1993, Michael Jackson agreed to a rare television interview with Oprah Winfrey to quell rumors. 
Michael Jackson explained that the change in his skin tone was the result of a skin condition known as vitiligo, and he opened up about the abuse he suffered from his father.
By the turn of the century, Michael Jackson was increasingly becoming known for his eccentricities, which included wearing a surgical mask in public. 
In 2002, Michael Jackson made headlines when he seemed confused and disoriented on stage at the MTV Video Music Awards. 
In 2002, Michael Jackson received enormous criticism for dangling his baby son, Blanket, over a balcony while greeting fans in Berlin, Germany. 
In a later interview, Michael Jackson explained that "We were waiting for thousands of fans down below, and they were chanting they wanted to see my child, so I was kind enough to let them see. 
I was doing something out of innocence."
Michael Jackson died on June 25, 2009, at the age of 50 after suffering a cardiac arrest in his Los Angeles home. 
CPR attempts failed and he was rushed to the hospital, where Michael Jackson died later that morning. 
In February 2010, an official coroner's report revealed Michael Jackson’s cause of death was acute propofol intoxication, or a lethal overdose on a prescription drug cocktail including the sedatives midazolam, diazepam and lidocaine.
Aided by his personal physician, Dr. Conrad Murray, Michael Jackson had been taking sedative drugs to help him sleep at night. 
Murray told police that he believed Michael Jackson had developed a particular addiction to propofol, which Jackson referred to as his "milk." 
Murray reportedly administered propofol by IV in the evenings, in 50-milligram dosages, and was attempting to wean the pop star off the drug around the time of Michael Jackson’s death.
A police investigation revealed that Murray was not licensed to prescribe most controlled drugs in the state of California. 
The steps he had taken to save Michael Jackson also came under scrutiny, as evidence showed that the standard of care for administering propofol had not been met, and the recommended equipment for patient monitoring, precision dosing and resuscitation had not been present.
As a result, Michael Jackson’s death was ruled a homicide. Murray was convicted of involuntary manslaughter on November 7, 2011, earning a maximum prison sentence of four years.
Michael Jackson’s death resulted in an outpouring of public grief and sympathy. 
Memorials were erected around the world, including one at the arena where he was set to perform and another at his childhood home in Gary, Indiana.
The Michael Jackson family held a private funeral on September 3, 2009, at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California, for immediate family members and 200 guests. 
Celebrity mourners included Michael Jackson’s ex-wife, Lisa Marie Presley, and actress Elizabeth Taylor.

"King of Pop" redirects here
For other uses, see King of Pop (disambiguation) and Michael Jackson (disambiguation).
Michael Jackson
A photograph of Michael Jackson singing into a microphone
Jackson performing at the Praterstadion in Vienna, Austria on June 2, 1988
Born	Michael Joseph Jackson

August 29, 1958
Gary, Indiana, U.S.
Died	June 25, 2009 (aged 50)
Los Angeles, California, U.S.
Cause of death	Cardiac arrest induced by acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication
Buried
	
Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale, California, U.S.
Other names	Michael Joe Jackson
Occupation	

    Singer songwriter dancer

Spouse(s)	Lisa Marie Presley
(m
1994; div
1996)

Debbie Rowe
(m
1996; div
1999)
Children	

    Michael Jr.ParisBlanket

Parent(s)	Joe Jackson
Katherine Jackson
Family	Jackson family
Awards	List of awards and nominations
Musical career
Genres	

    Popsoulfunkrhythm and bluesrockdiscopost-discodance-popnew jack swing

Instruments	Vocals
Years active	1964–2009
Labels	

    SteeltownMotownEpicLegacySonyMJJ Productions

Associated acts	

    The Jackson 5

Website	www.michaeljackson.com
Signature
Michael Jackson signature.svg

Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter, and dancer
Dubbed the "King of Pop", he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the 20th century and one of the greatest entertainers in the history of music
Jackson's contributions to music, dance, and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades.

The eighth child of the Jackson family, Michael made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5
He began his solo career in 1971 while at Motown Records, and rose to solo stardom with the critically acclaimed Off the Wall (1979)
By the early 1980s, Jackson became a dominant figure in popular music
His music videos, including those for "Beat It", "Billie Jean", and "Thriller" from his 1982 album Thriller, are credited with breaking racial barriers and transforming the medium into an art form and promotional tool
Their popularity helped bring the television channel MTV to fame
Bad (1987) was the first album to produce five Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles.[nb 1] Jackson continued to innovate throughout the 1990s with videos such as "Black or White" and "Scream", and forged a reputation as a touring artist
Through stage and video performances, Jackson popularized complicated dance techniques such as the moonwalk, to which he gave the name
His sound and style have influenced artists of various genres.

Jackson is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with estimated sales of over 350 million records worldwide;[nb 2] Thriller is the best-selling album of all time, with estimated sales of 66 million copies worldwide
His other albums, including Off the Wall (1979), Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), and HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995), also rank among the world's best-selling
He won hundreds of awards (more than any other artist in the history of popular music), has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice, and is the only pop or rock artist to have been inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame
His other achievements include a record 39 Guinness World Records (including the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time), 15 Grammy Awards (including the Legend and Lifetime Achievement awards), 26 American Music Awards, and 13 Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles (more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era)
Jackson was the first artist to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades
In 2016, Jackson's estate earned $825 million, the highest yearly amount for a celebrity ever recorded by Forbes.

In the late 1980s, Jackson became a figure of controversy for his changing appearance, relationships, behavior and lifestyle
In 1993, he was accused of sexually abusing the child of a family friend
The lawsuit was settled out of court, and Jackson was not indicted
In 2005, he was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and several other charges
In 2009, while preparing for a series of comeback concerts, This Is It, Jackson died from an overdose of sedatives administered by his personal physician, Conrad Murray
Jackson's fans around the world expressed their grief, and his public memorial service was broadcast live
The 2019 documentary Leaving Neverland details child sexual abuse allegations from two former child friends of Jackson, which led to an international backlash against him and drew criticism from his fans and associates.
Contents

    1 Life and career
        1.1 1958–1975: Early life and the Jackson 5
        1.2 1975–1981: Move to Epic and Off the Wall
        1.3 1982–1983: Thriller and Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever
        1.4 1984–1985: Pepsi, "We Are the World", and business career
        1.5 1986–1987: Changing appearance, tabloids, and films
        1.6 1987–1990: Bad, autobiography, and Neverland
        1.7 1991–1993: Dangerous, Heal the World Foundation, and Super Bowl XXVII halftime show
        1.8 1993–1995: First child sexual abuse accusations and first marriage
        1.9 1995–1997: HIStory, second marriage, and fatherhood
        1.10 1997–2002: Label dispute and Invincible
        1.11 2002–2005: Second child sexual abuse allegations, trial, and acquittal
        1.12 2006–2009: Closure of Neverland, final years, and This Is It
    2 Death
        2.1 Memorial service
        2.2 Criminal investigation and prosecution
        2.3 Posthumous sales
        2.4 Posthumous releases and productions
        2.5 Leaving Neverland and posthumous child sexual abuse allegations
    3 Legacy and influence
    4 Artistry
        4.1 Influences
        4.2 Musicianship
        4.3 Themes and genres
        4.4 Vocal style
        4.5 Music videos and choreography
    5 Honors and awards
    6 Earnings
    7 Discography
    8 Filmography
    9 Tours
    10 Notes
    11 References
        11.1 Citations
        11.2 Print sources
    12 External links

Life and career
1958–1975: Early life and the Jackson 5
The single-story house has white walls, two windows, a central white door with a black door frame, and a black roof
In front of the house there is a walkway and multiple colored flowers and memorabilia.
Jackson's childhood home in Gary, Indiana, pictured in March 2010 with floral tributes after his death

Michael Joseph Jackson was born in Gary, Indiana, near Chicago, on August 29, 1958
He was the eighth of ten children in the Jackson family, a working-class African-American family living in a two-bedroom house on Jackson Street
His mother, Katherine Esther Jackson (née Scruse), played clarinet and piano, had aspired to be a country-and-western performer, and worked part-time at Sears
She was a Jehovah's Witness
His father, Joseph Walter "Joe" Jackson, a former boxer, was a crane operator at U.S
Steel and played guitar with a local rhythm and blues band, the Falcons, to supplement the family's income
His father's great-grandfather, July "Jack" Gale, was a Native American medicine man and US Army scout
Michael grew up with three sisters (Rebbie, La Toya, and Janet) and five brothers (Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon, and Randy)
A sixth brother, Marlon's twin Brandon, died shortly after birth.

Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped Michael; Michael said his father told him he had a "fat nose," and regularly physically and emotionally abused him during rehearsals
He recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, ready to physically punish any mistakes
Katherine Jackson stated that although whipping is considered abuse in more modern times, it was a common way to discipline children when Michael was growing up
Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon have said that their father was not abusive and that the whippings, which were harder on Michael because he was younger, kept them disciplined and out of trouble
In an interview with Oprah Winfrey in 1993, Jackson said that his youth had been lonely and isolated.

In 1964, Michael and Marlon joined the Jackson Brothers—a band formed by their father which included Jackie, Tito, and Jermaine—as backup musicians playing congas and tambourine
Later that year, Michael began sharing lead vocals with Jermaine, and the group's name was changed to the Jackson 5
The following year, the group won a talent show; Michael performed the dance to Robert Parker's 1965 song "Barefootin'" and singing lead to The Temptations' "My Girl." From 1966 to 1968 they toured the Midwest; they frequently played at a string of black clubs known as the "Chitlin' Circuit" as the opening act for artists such as Sam & Dave, the O'Jays, Gladys Knight, and Etta James
The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges, where striptease shows were featured, and at local auditoriums and high school dances
In August 1967, while touring the East Coast, they won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
Jackson (center) as a member of the Jackson 5 in 1972

The Jackson 5 recorded several songs for a Gary record label, Steeltown Records; their first single, "Big Boy", was released in 1968
Bobby Taylor of Bobby Taylor & the Vancouvers brought the Jackson 5 to Motown after the group opened for Taylor at Chicago's Regal Theater in 1968
Taylor also produced some of their early recordings for the label, including a version of "Who's Lovin' You." After signing with Motown, the Jackson family relocated from Gary to Los Angeles
In 1969, executives at Motown decided Diana Ross should introduce the Jackson 5 to the public—partly to bolster her career in television—sending off what was considered Motown's last product of its "production line"
The Jackson 5 made their first television appearance in 1969 in the Miss Black America Pageant where they performed a cover of "It's Your Thing." Rolling Stone later described the young Michael as "a prodigy" with "overwhelming musical gifts" who "quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer".

In January 1970, "I Want You Back" became the first Jackson 5 song to reach number one the US Billboard Hot 100; it stayed there for four weeks
Three more singles with Motown—"ABC", "The Love You Save", and "I'll Be There"—also topped the chart
In May 1971, the Jackson family moved into a large house on a two-acre estate in Encino, California
During this period, Michael developed from a child performer into a teen idol
As he emerged as a solo performer in the early 1970s, he maintained ties to the Jackson 5
Between 1972 and 1975, Michael released four solo studio albums with Motown: Got to Be There (1972), Ben (1972), Music & Me (1973), and Forever, Michael (1975)
"Got to Be There" and "Ben," the title tracks from his first two solo albums, sold well as singles, as did a cover of Bobby Day's "Rockin' Robin."

The Jackson 5 were later described as "a cutting-edge example of black crossover artists." They were frustrated by Motown's refusal to allow them creative input
Jackson's performance of their top five single "Dancing Machine" on Soul Train popularized the robot dance.
1975–1981: Move to Epic and Off the Wall
From left, back row: Jackie Jackson, Michael Jackson, Tito Jackson, Marlon Jackson
Middle row: Randy Jackson, La Toya Jackson, Rebbie Jackson
Front row: Janet Jackson (1977)

In 1975, the Jackson 5 left Motown
They signed with Epic Records, a subsidiary of CBS Records, and renamed themselves the Jacksons
Their younger brother Randy joined the band around this time; Jermaine stayed with Motown and pursued a solo career
The Jacksons continued to tour internationally, and released six more albums between 1976 and 1984
Michael, the group's main songwriter during this time, wrote songs such as "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" (1979), "This Place Hotel" (1980), and "Can You Feel It" (1980).

In 1978, Jackson moved to New York City to star as the Scarecrow in The Wiz, a musical directed by Sidney Lumet
It costarred Diana Ross, Nipsey Russell, and Ted Ross
The film was a box-office failure
Its score was arranged by Quincy Jones, who later produced three of Jackson's solo albums
During his time in New York, Jackson frequented the Studio 54 nightclub, where he heard early hip hop; this influenced his beatboxing on future tracks such as "Working Day and Night"
In 1979, Jackson broke his nose during a dance routine
A rhinoplasty led to breathing difficulties that later affected his career
He was referred to Steven Hoefflin, who performed Jackson's subsequent operations.

Jackson's fifth solo album, Off the Wall (1979), established him as a solo performer and helped him move from the bubblegum pop of his youth to more complex sounds
It produced four top 10 entries in the US: "Off the Wall", "She's Out of My Life", and the chart-topping singles "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough" and "Rock with You"
The album reached number three on the US Billboard 200 and sold over 20 million copies worldwide
In 1980, Jackson won three American Music Awards for his solo work: Favorite Soul/R&B Album, Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist, and Favorite Soul/R&B Single for "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough"
He also won a Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for 1979 with "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough"
In 1981 Jackson was the American Music Awards winner for Favorite Soul/R&B Album and Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist
Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a bigger impact, and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release
In 1980, he secured the highest royalty rate in the music industry: 37 percent of wholesale album profit.
1982–1983: Thriller and Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever

Jackson recorded with Queen singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983, recording demos of "State of Shock", "Victory" and "There Must Be More to Life Than This"
The recordings were intended for an album of duets but, according to Queen's manager Jim Beach, the relationship soured when Jackson brought a llama into the recording studio, and Jackson was upset by Mercury's drug use
The songs were released in 2014
Jackson went on to record "State of Shock" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album Victory (1984)
In 1982, Jackson contributed "Someone in the Dark" to the storybook for the film E.T
the Extra-Terrestrial
Jackson's sixth album, Thriller, was released in late 1982
It was the best-selling album worldwide in 1983, and became the best-selling album of all time in the US and the best-selling album of all time worldwide, selling an estimated 66 million copies
It topped the Billboard 200 chart for 37 weeks and was in the top 10 of the 200 for 80 consecutive weeks
It was the first album to have seven Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles, including "Billie Jean", "Beat It", and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' ".

On March 25, 1983, Jackson reunited with his brothers for Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever, an NBC television special
The show aired on May 16, 1983, to an estimated audience of 47 million, and featured the Jacksons and other Motown stars
Jackson's solo performance of "Billie Jean" earned him his first Emmy Award nomination
Wearing a glove decorated with rhinestones, he debuted his moonwalk dance, which Jeffrey Daniel had taught him three years earlier, and it became his signature dance in his repertoire
Jackson had originally turned down the invitation to the show, believing he had been doing too much television
But at the request of Motown founder Berry Gordy, he performed in exchange for an opportunity to do a solo performance
Rolling Stone reporter Mikal Gilmore called the performance "extraordinary." Jackson's performance drew comparisons to Elvis Presley's and the Beatles' appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show
Anna Kisselgoff of The New York Times praised the perfect timing and technique involved in the dance
Gordy described being "mesmerized" by the performance.
A sparkly jacket and gloves, displayed inside a transparent vertical tube.
The sequined jacket and white glove worn by Jackson at Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever

At the 26th Annual Grammy Awards, Thriller won eight awards, while Jackson also won an award for the E.T
the Extra-Terrestial storybook
Winning eight Grammys in one ceremony is a record he holds with the band Santana
Jackson and Quincy Jones won the award for Producer of the Year (Non-Classical)
Thriller won Album of the Year (with Jackson as the album's artist and Jones as its co-producer), and the single won Best Pop Vocal Performance (Male) award for Jackson
"Beat It" won Record of the Year and Best Rock Vocal Performance (Male)
"Billie Jean" won two Grammy awards: Best R&B Song and Best R&B Vocal Performance (Male), with Jackson as songwriter and singer respectively
Thriller also won the Grammy for Best Engineered Recording (Non Classical), acknowledging Bruce Swedien for his work on the album
At the 11th Annual American Music Awards, Jackson won another eight awards and became the youngest artist to win the Award of Merit
He also won Favorite Male Artist, Favorite Soul/R&B Artist, and Favorite Pop/Rock Artist
"Beat It" won Favorite Soul/R&B Video, Favorite Pop/Rock Video and Favorite Pop/Rock Single
The album collectively won Favorite Soul/R&B Album and Favorite Pop/Rock Album.

Jackson had the highest royalty rate in the music industry at that point, with about $2 for every album sold, and was making record-breaking profits
Dolls modeled after Jackson appeared in stores in May 1984 for $12 each
In the same year, The Making of Michael Jackson's Thriller, a music documentary, won a Grammy for Best Music Video (Longform)
Time described Jackson's influence at that point as "star of records, radio, rock video
A one-man rescue team for the music business
A songwriter who sets the beat for a decade
A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street
A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style and color too." The New York Times wrote "in the world of pop music, there is Michael Jackson and there is everybody else."
1984–1985: Pepsi, "We Are the World", and business career

In November 1983, Jackson and his brothers partnered with PepsiCo in a $5 million promotional deal that broke records for a celebrity endorsement
The first Pepsi campaign, which ran in the US from 1983 to 1984 and launched its "New Generation" theme, included tour sponsorship, public relations events, and in-store displays
Jackson helped to create the advertisement, and suggested using his song "Billie Jean", with revised lyrics, as its jingle.

On January 27, 1984, Michael and other members of the Jacksons filmed a Pepsi commercial overseen by Phil Dusenberry, a BBDO ad agency executive, and Alan Pottasch, Pepsi's Worldwide Creative Director, at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles
During a simulated concert before a full house of fans, pyrotechnics accidentally set Jackson's hair on fire, causing second-degree burns to his scalp
Jackson underwent treatment to hide the scars and had his third rhinoplasty shortly thereafter
Pepsi settled out of court, and Jackson donated the $1.5 million settlement to the Brotman Medical Center in Culver City, California; its Michael Jackson Burn Center is named in his honor
Jackson signed a second agreement with Pepsi in the late 1980s for $10 million
The second campaign covered 20 countries and provided financial support for Jackson's Bad album and 1987–88 world tour
Jackson had endorsements and advertising deals with other companies, such as LA Gear, Suzuki, and Sony, but none were as significant as his deals with Pepsi.

On May 14, 1984, President Ronald Reagan gave Jackson an award for his support of alcohol and drug abuse charities, and in recognition of his support for the Ad Council's and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's Drunk Driving Prevention campaign
Jackson allowed the campaign to use "Beat It" for its public service announcements.
President Ronald Reagan and first lady Nancy Reagan present Jackson with an award at the White House on May 14, 1984
Jackson inside the White House with the Reagans

The Victory Tour of 1984 headlined the Jacksons and showcased Jackson's new solo material to more than two million Americans
It was the last tour he did with his brothers
Following controversy over the concert's ticket sales, Jackson donated his share of the proceeds, an estimated $3 to 5 million, to charity
During the last concert of the Victory Tour at the Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, Jackson announced his split from The Jacksons during "Shake Your Body"
His charitable work continued with the release of "We Are the World" (1985), co-written with Lionel Richie, which raised money for the poor in the US and Africa
It earned $63 million, and became one of the best-selling singles of all time, with 20 million copies sold
It won four Grammys for 1985, including Song of the Year for Jackson and Richie as its writers
The project's creators received two special American Music Awards honors: one for the creation of the song and another for the USA for Africa idea
Jackson, Jones, and promoter Ken Kragan received special awards for their roles in the song's creation.

Jackson collaborated with Paul McCartney in the early 1980s, and learned that McCartney was making $40 million a year from owning the rights to other artists' songs
By 1983, Jackson had begun buying publishing rights to others' songs, but he was careful with his acquisitions, only bidding on a few of the dozens that were offered to him
Jackson's early acquisitions of music catalogs and song copyrights such as the Sly Stone collection included "Everyday People" (1968), Len Barry's "1-2-3" (1965), and Dion DiMucci's "The Wanderer" (1961) and "Runaround Sue" (1961).

In 1984 Robert Holmes à Court announced he was selling the ATV Music Publishing catalog comprising the publishing rights to nearly 4000 songs, including most of the Beatles' material
In 1981, McCartney had been offered the catalog for £20 million ($40 million)
Jackson submitted a bid of $46 million on November 20, 1984
When Jackson and McCartney were unable to make a joint purchase, McCartney did not want to be the sole owner of the Beatles' songs, and did not pursue an offer on his own
Jackson's agents were unable to come to a deal, and in May 1985 left talks after having spent more than $1 million and four months of due diligence work on the negotiations
In June 1985, Jackson and Branca learned that Charles Koppelman's and Marty Bandier's The Entertainment Company had made a tentative offer to buy ATV Music for $50 million; in early August, Holmes à Court contacted Jackson and talks resumed
Jackson's increased bid of $47.5 million was accepted because he could close the deal more quickly, having already completed due diligence
Jackson also agreed to visit Holmes à Court in Australia, where he would appear on the Channel Seven Perth Telethon
Jackson's purchase of ATV Music was finalized on August 10, 1985.
1986–1987: Changing appearance, tabloids, and films
See also: Health and appearance of Michael Jackson

Jackson's skin had been medium-brown during his youth, but from the mid-1980s gradually grew paler
The change drew widespread media coverage, including speculation that he had been bleaching his skin
Jackson's dermatologist, Arnold Klein, said he observed in 1983 that Jackson had vitiligo, a condition characterized by patches of the skin losing their pigment, and sensitivity to sunlight
He also identified discoid lupus erythematosus in Jackson
He diagnosed Jackson with lupus that year, and with vitiligo in 1986
Vitiligo's drastic effects on the body can cause psychological distress
Jackson used fair-colored makeup, and possibly skin-bleaching prescription creams, to cover up the uneven blotches of color caused by the illness
The creams would have further lightened his skin, and, with the application of makeup, he could appear very pale
Jackson said he had not purposely bleached his skin and could not control his vitiligo, adding, "When people make up stories that I don't want to be who I am, it hurts me." He became friends with Klein and Klein's nurse Debbie Rowe
Rowe later became Jackson's second wife and the mother of his first two children.

In his autobiography and the 1993 interview with Winfrey, Jackson said he had had two rhinoplasty surgeries and a cleft chin surgery but no more than that
He said he lost weight in the early 1980s because of a change in diet to achieve a dancer's body
Witnesses reported that he was often dizzy, and speculated he was suffering from anorexia nervosa
Periods of weight loss became a recurring problem later in his life
After his death, his mother Katherine told Winfrey that he first turned to cosmetic procedures to remedy his vitiligo, because he did not want to look like a "spotted cow." She said her son had received more than the two cosmetic surgeries he claimed and speculated that he was addicted to them.

In 1986, tabloids reported that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow aging, and pictured him lying in a glass box
The claim was untrue, and tabloids reported that he spread the story himself
It was also reported, by the tabloids, that Jackson took female hormone shots to keep his voice high and facial hair wispy, proposed to Elizabeth Taylor and possibly had a shrine of her, and had cosmetic surgery on his eyes
Jackson's manager Frank DiLeo denied all of them, except for Jackson having a chamber
DiLeo added "I don't know if he sleeps in it
I'm not for it
But Michael thinks it's something that's probably healthy for him
He's a bit of a health fanatic."

When Jackson took his pet chimpanzee Bubbles to tour in Japan, their public appearances caused a stir in the media
They portrayed Jackson as an aspiring Disney cartoon character who befriended various animals
Meanwhile, it was also reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph Merrick (the "Elephant Man")
In June 1987, the Chicago Tribune reported Jackson's publicist bidding $1 million for the skeleton to the London Hospital Medical College on his behalf
The college maintained the skeleton was not for sale
DiLeo said Jackson had an "absorbing interest" in Merrick, "purely based on his awareness of the ethical, medical and historical significance."

These tabloid stories inspired the name "Wacko Jacko," which Jackson came to despise
According to music journalist Joseph Vogel, the demeaning name first appeared in British tabloid The Sun in 1985
The name's origins come from Jacko Macacco, the name of a famous monkey used in monkey-baiting matches at the Westminster Pit in the early 1820s
"Jacko" was subsequently used in Cockney slang to refer to monkeys in general, hence a racist connotation behind the name.

In 1987, Rolling Stone described Jackson as "the flighty-genius star-child, a celebrity virtually all his life, who dwells in a fairy-tale kingdom of fellow celebrities, animals, mannequins and cartoons, who provides endless fodder for the tabloids...
But it’s the same child in Michael who inspires the artistry that fuels all the subsidiary industries, who turns his primal fears and fantasies into wondrous, hyperkinetic and emotional music."

Jackson worked with George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola on the 17-minute $30 million 3D film Captain EO, which ran from 1986 at Disneyland and Epcot, and later at Tokyo Disneyland and Euro Disneyland
After having been removed in the late 1990s, it returned to the theme park for several years after Jackson's death
In 1987, Jackson disassociated himself from the Jehovah's Witnesses
Katherine Jackson said this might have been because some Witnesses strongly opposed the Thriller video
Jackson had denounced it in a Witness publication in 1984.
1987–1990: Bad, autobiography, and Neverland
A man is singing into a microphone under a spotlight
He wears a blue open-neck shirt over a white T-shirt, and dark pants
There are two colorfully-dressed men on either side of him.
Jackson (center) performing in 1988

Jackson's first album in five years, Bad (1987), was highly anticipated, with the industry expecting another major success
It became the first album to produce five US number-one singles: "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana"
Another song, "Smooth Criminal", peaked at number seven
Bad won the 1988 Grammy for Best Engineered Recording – Non Classical and the 1990 Grammy Award for Best Music Video, Short Form for "Leave Me Alone"
Jackson won an Award of Achievement at the American Music Awards in 1989 after Bad generated five number-one singles, became the first album to top the charts in 25 countries and the best-selling album worldwide in 1987 and 1988
By 2012, it had sold between 30 and 45 million copies worldwide.

The Bad world tour ran from September 12, 1987 to January 14, 1989
In Japan, the tour had 14 sellouts and drew 570,000 people, nearly tripling the previous record for a single tour
The 504,000 people who attended seven sold-out shows at Wembley Stadium set a new Guinness world record.
A black jacket with five round golden medals on its left and right shoulders, a gold band on its left arm sleeve, and two belt straps on the right bottom sleeve
Underneath the jacket is a golden belt, with a round ornament in its center.
Jackson wore a gold-plated military style jacket with belt during the Bad era

In 1988, Jackson released his autobiography, Moonwalk, with input from Stephen Davis and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis
It sold 200,000 copies, and reached the top of the New York Times bestsellers list
Jackson discussed his childhood, the Jackson 5, and the abuse from his father
He attributed his changing facial appearance to three plastic surgeries, puberty, weight loss, a strict vegetarian diet, a change in hairstyle, and stage lighting
In October, Jackson released a film, Moonwalker, which featured live footage and short films starring Jackson and Joe Pesci
In the US it was released direct-to-video and became the best-selling video cassette
The RIAA certified it as Platinum.

In March 1988, Jackson purchased 2,700 acres (11 km2) of land near Santa Ynez, California, to build a new home, Neverland Ranch, at a cost of $17 million
He installed a Ferris wheel, a carousel, a movie theater and a zoo
A security staff of 40 patrolled the grounds
Shortly afterwards, he appeared in the first Western television advertisement in the Soviet Union.

Jackson became known as the "King of Pop", a nickname that Jackson's publicists embraced
When Elizabeth Taylor presented him with the Soul Train Heritage Award in 1989, she called him "the true king of pop, rock and soul." President George H
W
Bush designated him the White House's "Artist of the Decade"
From 1985 to 1990, Jackson donated $455,000 to the United Negro College Fund, and all profits from his single "Man in the Mirror" went to charity
His rendition of "You Were There" at Sammy Davis Jr.'s 60th birthday celebration won Jackson a second Emmy nomination.
1991–1993: Dangerous, Heal the World Foundation, and Super Bowl XXVII halftime show

In March 1991, Jackson renewed his contract with Sony for $65 million, a record-breaking deal, beating Neil Diamond's renewal contract with Columbia Records
In 1991, he released his eighth album, Dangerous, co-produced with Teddy Riley
It was certified seven times platinum in the US, and by 2008 had sold 30 million copies worldwide
In the US, the first single, "Black or White", was the album's highest charting song; it was number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for seven weeks and achieved similar chart performances worldwide
The second single, "Remember the Time" peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart
At the end of 1992, Dangerous was the best-selling album of the year worldwide and "Black or White" the best-selling single of the year worldwide at the Billboard Music Awards
Jackson was also the best-selling artist of the 1980s
In 1993, he performed "Remember the Time" at the Soul Train Music Awards in a chair, saying he twisted his ankle during dance rehearsals
In the UK, "Heal the World" made No
2 on the charts in 1992.
Jackson during the Dangerous World Tour in 1993

Jackson founded the Heal the World Foundation in 1992
The charity brought underprivileged children to Jackson's ranch to use the theme park rides, and sent millions of dollars around the globe to help children threatened by war, poverty, and disease
That July, Jackson published his second book, Dancing the Dream, a collection of poetry
The Dangerous World Tour ran between June 1992 and November 1993 and grossed $100 million; Jackson performed for 3.5 million people in 70 concerts, all of which were outside the US
Part of the proceeds went to Heal the World Foundation
Jackson sold the broadcast rights of the tour to HBO for $20 million, a record-breaking deal that still stands.

Following the death of HIV/AIDS spokesperson and friend Ryan White, Jackson pleaded with the Clinton administration at Bill Clinton's inaugural gala to give more money to HIV/AIDS charities and research and performed "Gone Too Soon", a song dedicated to White, and "Heal the World" at the gala
Jackson visited Africa in early 1992; on his first stop in Gabon he was greeted by more than 100,000 people, some of them carrying signs that read "Welcome Home Michael"
During his trip to Ivory Coast, Jackson was crowned "King Sani" by a tribal chief
He thanked the dignitaries in French and English, signed documents formalizing his kingship, and sat on a golden throne while presiding over ceremonial dances.

In January 1993, Jackson performed at the Super Bowl XXVII halftime show in Pasadena, California
The NFL sought a big-name artist to keep ratings high during halftime following dwindling audience figures
It was the first Super Bowl whose half-time performance drew greater audience figures than the game
Jackson played "Jam", "Billie Jean", "Black or White", and "Heal the World"
Dangerous rose 90 places in the album chart after the performance.

Jackson gave a 90-minute interview to Winfrey on February 10, 1993
He spoke of his childhood abuse at the hands of his father; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood, and said that he often cried from loneliness
He denied tabloid rumors that he had bought the bones of the Elephant Man, slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber, or bleached his skin, and stated for the first time that he had vitiligo
Dangerous re-entered the album chart in the top 10, more than a year after its release.

In January 1993, Jackson won three American Music Awards: Favorite Pop/Rock Album (Dangerous), Favorite Soul/R&B Single ("Remember the Time"), and was the first to win the International Artist Award of Excellence
In February, he won the "Living Legend Award" at the 35th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles
He attended the award ceremony with Brooke Shields
Dangerous was nominated for Best Vocal Performance (for "Black or White"), Best R&B Vocal Performance ("Jam") and Best R&B Song ("Jam"), and Swedien and Riley won the award for Best Engineered – Non Classical.
1993–1995: First child sexual abuse accusations and first marriage
Main article: 1993 child sexual abuse accusations against Michael Jackson

In August 1993, Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse by a 13-year-old boy, Jordan Chandler, and his father, Evan Chandler
Jordan said he and Jackson had engaged in acts of kissing, masturbation and oral sex
Jordan's mother initially told police that she did not believe Jackson had molested her son; however, her position wavered a few days later
Evan was recorded discussing his intention to pursue charges, which Jackson used to argue that he was the victim of a jealous father trying to extort money
Jackson's older sister La Toya accused him of being a pedophile, which she later retracted
Police raided Jackson's home in December and found books and photographs featuring young boys with little or no clothing
The books were legal to own, and Jackson was not indicted
Jordan Chandler gave police a description of Jackson's genitals
A strip search was made, and the jurors felt the description was not a match
In January 1994, Jackson settled with the Chandlers out of court for $25 million
The police never pressed criminal charges
Citing a lack of evidence without Jordan's testimony, the state closed its investigation on September 22, 1994.

Jackson had been taking painkillers for his reconstructive scalp surgeries, administered due to the Pepsi commercial accident in 1984, and became dependent on them to cope with the stress of the sexual abuse allegations
On November 12, 1993, Jackson canceled the remainder of the Dangerous Tour due to health problems, stress from the allegations and painkiller addiction
He thanked close friend Elizabeth Taylor for support, encouragement and counsel
The end of the tour concluded his relationship with Pepsi-Cola which sponsored the tour.

In late 1993 Jackson proposed to Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of Elvis Presley, over the phone
They married in La Vega, Dominican Republic in May 1994 by civil judge Hugo Francisco Alvarez Perez
The tabloid media speculated that the wedding was a publicity stunt to deflect Jackson's sexual abuse allegations and jump-start Presley's career as a singer
Their marriage ended little more than a year later, and they separated in December 1995
Presley cited "irreconcilable differences" when filing for divorce the next month and only sought to reclaim her maiden name as her settlement
After the divorce, Judge Perez said, "They lasted longer than I thought they would
I gave them a year
They lasted a year and a half."
1995–1997: HIStory, second marriage, and fatherhood

In June 1995, Jackson released the double album HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I
The first disc, HIStory Begins, is a greatest hits album (reissued in 2001 as Greatest Hits: HIStory, Volume I)
The second disc, HIStory Continues, contains 13 original songs and two cover versions
The album debuted at number one on the charts and has been certified for seven million shipments in the US
It is the best-selling multi-disc album of all time, with 20 million copies (40 million units) sold worldwide
HIStory received a Grammy nomination for Album of the Year
The New York Times reviewed it as "the testimony of a musician whose self-pity now equals his talent".

The first single from HIStory was "Scream/Childhood"
"Scream", a duet with Jackson's youngest sister Janet, protests the media's treatment of Jackson during the 1993 child abuse allegations against him
The single made number five on the Billboard Hot 100, and received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals"
The second single, "You Are Not Alone", holds the Guinness world record for the first song to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart
It received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Vocal Performance" in 1995.

In 1995 the Anti-Defamation League and other groups complained that "Jew me, sue me, everybody do me/ Kick me, kike me, don't you black or white me", the original lyrics of "They Don't Care About Us", were antisemitic
Jackson released a version with revised words.

In late 1995, Jackson was admitted to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance, caused by a stress-related panic attack
In November, Jackson merged his ATV Music catalog with Sony's music publishing division, creating Sony/ATV Music Publishing
He retained ownership of half the company, earning $95 million up front as well as the rights to more songs.

"Earth Song" was the third single released from HIStory, and topped the UK Singles Chart for six weeks over Christmas 1995
It became the 87th-best selling single in the nation
At the 1996 Brit Awards, Jackson's performance of "Earth Song" was disrupted by a drunken Jarvis Cocker and his Pulp band-mate Peter Mansell, who were protesting what Cocker saw as Jackson's "Christ-like" persona
Jackson said the stage invasion was "disgusting and cowardly".

In 1996, Jackson won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form for "Scream" and an American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Male Artist.

Jackson promoted HIStory with the HIStory World Tour, from September 7, 1996 to October 15, 1997
He performed 82 concerts in five continents, 35 countries and 58 cities to over 4.5 million fans, his most attended tour
It grossed $165 million
During the tour, in Sydney, Australia, Jackson married Debbie Rowe, a dermatology nurse, who was six months pregnant with his first child
Michael Joseph Jackson Jr
(commonly known as Prince) was born on February 13, 1997; his sister Paris-Michael Katherine Jackson was born a year later on April 3, 1998
Jackson and Rowe divorced in 1999, and Rowe conceded custody of the children, with an $8 million settlement
In 2004, after the second child abuse allegations against Jackson, she returned to court to reclaim custody
The suit was settled in 2006.

In 1997, Jackson released Blood on the Dance Floor: HIStory in the Mix, which contained remixes of singles from HIStory and five new songs
Worldwide sales stand at 6 million copies, making it the best-selling remix album of all time
It reached number one in the UK, as did the title track
In the US, the album reached number 24 and was certified platinum.
1997–2002: Label dispute and Invincible
Close-up of a pale skinned Jackson with black hair
He is wearing a black jacket with white designs on it.
Jackson at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival for the Michael Jackson's Ghosts music video premiere

From October 1997 to September 2001, Jackson worked on his tenth solo album, Invincible, which cost $30 million to record
In June 1999, Jackson joined Luciano Pavarotti for a War Child benefit concert in Modena, Italy
The show raised a million dollars for refugees of the Kosovo War, and additional funds for the children of Guatemala
Later that month, Jackson organized a series of "Michael Jackson & Friends" benefit concerts in Germany and Korea
Other artists involved included Slash, The Scorpions, Boyz II Men, Luther Vandross, Mariah Carey, A
R
Rahman, Prabhu Deva Sundaram, Shobana, Andrea Bocelli, and Luciano Pavarotti
The proceeds went to the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, the Red Cross and UNESCO
From August 1999 to 2000, he lived in New York City at 4 East 74th Street
At the turn of the century, Jackson won an American Music Award as Artist of the 1980s
In 2000, Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities, more than any other entertainer.

In September 2001, two 30th Anniversary concerts were held at Madison Square Garden to mark Jackson's 30th year as a solo artist
Jackson performed with his brothers for the first time since 1984
The show also featured Mýa, Usher, Whitney Houston, Destiny's Child, Monica, Liza Minnelli, and Slash
The first show was marred by technical lapses, and the crowd booed a speech by Marlon Brando
Almost 30 million people watched the television broadcast of the shows in November
After 9/11, Jackson helped organize the United We Stand: What More Can I Give benefit concert at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C
on October 21, 2001
Jackson performed "What More Can I Give" as the finale.

The release of Invincible was preceded by a dispute between Jackson and his record label, Sony Music Entertainment
Jackson had expected the licenses to the masters of his albums to revert to him in the early 2000s, after which he would be able to promote the material however he pleased and keep the profits, but clauses in the contract set the revert date years into the future
Jackson sought an early exit from his contract
Invincible was released on October 30, 2001
It was Jackson's first full-length album in six years, and the last album of original material he released in his lifetime
It debuted at number one in 13 countries and went on to sell 6 million copies worldwide, receiving double-platinum certification in the US.

On January 9, 2002, Jackson won his 22nd American Music Award for Artist of the Century
Later that year, an anonymous surrogate mother gave birth to his third child, Prince Michael Jackson II (nicknamed "Blanket"), who had been conceived by artificial insemination
On November 20, Jackson briefly held Blanket over the railing of his Berlin hotel room, four stories above ground level, prompting widespread criticism in the media
Jackson apologized for the incident, calling it "a terrible mistake." On January 22, promoter Marcel Avram filed a breach of contract complaint against Jackson for failing to perform two planned 1999 concerts
In March, a Santa Maria jury ordered Jackson to pay Avram $5.3 million
On December 18, 2003, Jackson's attorneys dropped all appeals on the verdict and settled the lawsuit for an undisclosed amount.

In July 2002, Jackson called Sony Music chairman Tommy Mottola "a racist, and very, very, very devilish," and someone who exploits black artists for his own gain, at Al Sharpton's National Action Network in Harlem
The accusation prompted Sharpton to form a coalition investigating whether Mottola exploited black artists
Jackson also charged that Mottola had called his colleague Irv Gotti a "fat nigger"
Responding to those attacks, Sony issued a statement calling them "ludicrous, spiteful, and hurtful" and defended Mottola as someone who had championed Jackson's career for many years
Sony ultimately refused to renew Jackson's contract and claimed that a $25 million promotional campaign had failed because Jackson refused to tour in the US for Invincible.
2002–2005: Second child sexual abuse allegations, trial, and acquittal
Further information: Living with Michael Jackson and Trial of Michael Jackson
Jackson's mug shot in 2003

Beginning in May 2002, a documentary film crew led by Martin Bashir followed Jackson for several months
The documentary, broadcast in February 2003 as Living with Michael Jackson, showed Jackson holding hands and discussing sleeping arrangements with a 12-year-old boy
He also said that he saw nothing wrong with having sleepovers with minors and sharing his bed and bedroom with various people, which aroused controversy
He insisted that the sleepovers were not sexual and that his words had been misunderstood.

On December 18, 2003, Santa Barbara authorities charged Jackson with seven counts of child molestation and two counts of intoxicating a minor with alcoholic drinks
Jackson denied the allegations and pleaded not guilty
The People v
Jackson trial began on January 31, 2005, in Santa Maria, California, and lasted until the end of May
Jackson found the experience stressful and it affected his health
If convicted, he would have faced up to 20 years in prison
On June 13, 2005, Jackson was acquitted on all counts
After the trial, he became reclusive and moved to Bahrain as a guest of Sheikh Abdullah
Jermaine Jackson later said the family had planned to send Jackson there had he been convicted, unbeknownst to Jackson.

On November 18, 2003, Sony released Number Ones, a greatest hits compilation
It was certified triple platinum by the RIAA, and six times platinum in the UK, for shipments of at least 1.2 million units.
2006–2009: Closure of Neverland, final years, and This Is It
Jackson is wearing an overcoat and walking from left to right
His face is obscured by his hair
His son is wearing a mask and a baseball cap
Two men are with them; a third person is holding an umbrella over the Jacksons.
Jackson and his son Blanket in Disneyland Paris, 2006

In April 2006, Jackson agreed to use a piece of his ATV catalog stake as collateral against his $270 million worth of loans to Bank of America
The catalog was worth about $1 billion at the time
Bank of America had sold the loans to Fortress Investments, an investment company that buys distressed loans, the year before
As part of the agreement, Fortress Investments provided Jackson a new loan of $300 million with reduced interest payments
Sony Music would have the option to buy half of his stake, or about 25% of the catalog, at a set price
Jackson's financial managers had urged him to shed part of his stake to avoid bankruptcy
The main house at Neverland Ranch was closed as a cost-cutting measure, while Jackson lived in Bahrain at the hospitality of Sheik Abdullah, the ruler's son
At least 30 workers had not been paid on time and were owed $306,000 in back wages; Jackson also had to pay $100,000 in penalties.

In early 2006, it was announced that Jackson had signed a contract with a Bahrain-based startup, Two Seas Records; nothing came of the deal, and Two Seas CEO Guy Holmes later stated that it had never been finalized
That October, Fox News entertainment reporter Roger Friedman said Jackson had been recording at a studio in County Westmeath, Ireland
It was not known at the time what Jackson was working on, or who had paid for the sessions; his publicist had stated that he had left Two Seas by then.

In November 2006, Jackson invited an Access Hollywood camera crew into the studio in Westmeath, and MSNBC reported that he was working on a new album, produced by will.i.am
During his period in Ireland he sought out Patrick Treacy for cosmetic treatment after reading about his experience with hyaluronic acid (HLA) fillers and his charitable work in Africa
Treacy became Jackson's personal dermatologist soon afterward
On November 15, 2006, Jackson performed at the World Music Awards in London and accepted the Diamond Award honoring the sale of over 100 million of his records
He returned to the US in December 2006 to attend James Brown's funeral in Augusta, Georgia, where he gave a eulogy calling Brown his "greatest inspiration."

In 2007, Jackson and Sony bought another music publishing company, Famous Music LLC, formerly owned by Viacom
This deal gave him the rights to songs by Eminem and Beck, among others
In March 2007, Jackson gave a brief interview to the Associated Press in Tokyo, in which he said he had no regrets about his lifelong career despite difficulties and "deliberate attempts to hurt [him]." That month, Jackson visited a US Army post in Japan, Camp Zama, to greet over 3,000 troops and their families.

In September 2007, Jackson was still working on his next album, which he never completed
In 2008, Jackson and Sony released Thriller 25 to mark the 25th anniversary of the original Thriller
Two remixes were released as singles: "The Girl Is Mine 2008" (with will.i.am), based on an early demo version of the song without Paul McCartney, and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' 2008" with Akon
For Jackson's 50th birthday, Sony BMG released a series of greatest hits albums titled King of Pop
Different versions were released in various countries, based on polls of local fans.
A view from above of a large property in a semi-desert
The landscape is pale with clumps of vegetation
The property shows circular structures between the buildings.
An aerial view of part of Jackson's 2,800-acre (11 km2) Neverland Valley Ranch near Los Olivos, California, showing the rides

In 2008, Fortress Investments threatened to foreclose on Neverland Ranch, which Jackson had used as collateral for his loans
Fortress sold Jackson's debts to Colony Capital LLC
In November, Jackson transferred Neverland Ranch's title to Sycamore Valley Ranch Company LLC, a joint venture between Jackson and Colony Capital LLC
The deal earned him $35 million
Jackson arranged to sell a large collection of his memorabilia (more than 1,000 items) through Julien's Auction House
The auction was scheduled to take place between April 22 and 25, 2009
On the eve of the first public exhibit in March, Jackson filed a legal action to block the auction
Darren Julien, CEO of Julien's Auctions, was baffled by Jackson's sudden change of heart
Jackson changed his mind after pocketing between $200 million to $300 million of initial sales from a series of concerts to be held in London.

In March 2009, at a press conference at The O2 Arena, Jackson announced a series of comeback concerts titled This Is It amid speculation about his finances and health
The shows were to be his first major tour since the HIStory World Tour that ended in 1997
Jackson suggested he would retire after the shows
The initial plan was for 10 concerts in London, followed by shows in Paris, New York City and Mumbai
Randy Phillips, president and chief executive of AEG Live, predicted the first 10 dates would earn Jackson £50 million
The London residency show increased to 50 dates after record-breaking ticket sales; over one million sold in less than two hours
The concerts were to run from July 13, 2009 to March 6, 2010
Jackson rehearsed in Los Angeles in the weeks leading up to the tour under the direction of choreographer Kenny Ortega, whom he worked with during his previous tours
Most rehearsals took place at the Staples Center owned by AEG.
Death
Main articles: Death of Michael Jackson and Michael Jackson memorial service
Jackson's Star with flowers and notes on it
Fans placed flowers and notes on Jackson's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on the day of his death

On June 25, 2009, less than three weeks before the first show was due to begin in London, with all concerts sold out, Jackson died from a cardiac arrest
Conrad Murray, his personal physician, had given Jackson various medications to help him sleep at his rented mansion in Holmby Hills, Los Angeles
Paramedics received a 911 call at 12:22 pm Pacific time (19:22 UTC), and arrived three minutes later
Jackson was not breathing and CPR was performed
Resuscitation efforts continued en route to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, and for more than an hour after arriving there, but were unsuccessful, and he was pronounced dead at 2:26 pm Pacific time (21:26 UTC).

Jackson had taken propofol, lorazepam, and midazolam; his death was caused by a propofol overdose
News of his death spread quickly online, causing websites to slow down and crash from user overload, and putting unprecedented strain on services and websites including Google, AOL Instant Messenger, Twitter, and Wikipedia
Overall, web traffic rose by between 11% and 20%
MTV and BET aired marathons of Jackson's music videos
Jackson specials aired on television stations around the world
MTV briefly returned to its original music video format, and aired hours of Jackson's music videos, with live news specials featuring reactions from MTV personalities and other celebrities.
Memorial service
A large pink/cream-colored box in front of a stained glass window.
Jackson's tomb in the Holly Terrace of the Great Mausoleum, Forest Lawn Glendale

Jackson's memorial was held on July 7, 2009, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, preceded by a private family service at Forest Lawn Memorial Park's Hall of Liberty
Over 1.6 million fans applied for tickets to the memorial; the 8,750 recipients were drawn at random, and each received two tickets
The memorial service was one of the most watched events in streaming history, with an estimated US audience of 31.1 million.

Mariah Carey, Stevie Wonder, Lionel Richie, Jennifer Hudson, and Shaheen Jafargholi performed at the event
Smokey Robinson and Queen Latifah gave eulogies
Al Sharpton received a standing ovation with cheers when he told Jackson's children, "Wasn't nothing strange about your daddy
It was strange what your daddy had to deal with
But he dealt with it anyway." Jackson's 11-year-old daughter Paris Katherine, speaking publicly for the first time, wept as she addressed the crowd
The Rev
Lucious Smith provided a closing prayer
Jackson's body was entombed on September 3, 2009, at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.
Criminal investigation and prosecution
Main article: California v
Murray
Portrait and other tributes, including mural and messages from 650 Spanish fans, letters, pictures, teddy bears, and flowers.
Fan tributes at Jackson's tomb on the first anniversary of his death

In August 2009, the Los Angeles County Coroner ruled that Jackson's death was a homicide
Law enforcement officials charged Murray with involuntary manslaughter on February 8, 2010.

On June 25, 2010, the first anniversary of Jackson's death, fans, family and friends visited Jackson's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, his family home, and Forest Lawn Memorial Park
Many left tributes at the sites.

Murray's trial took place from September 27 to November 7, 2011, and he was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter and held without bail to await sentencing
22 days after the trial ended, Murray received the maximum sentence of four years in prison
He was released on October 28, 2013 due to California prison overcrowding and good behavior.
Posthumous sales

At the 2009 American Music Awards, Jackson won four posthumous awards, including two for his compilation album Number Ones, bringing his total American Music Awards to 26
In the year after his death, more than 8.2 million of Jackson's albums sold in the US, and 35 million albums worldwide, more than any other artist in 2009
He became the first artist to sell one million music downloads in a week, with 2.6 million song downloads
Thriller, Number Ones and The Essential Michael Jackson became the first catalog albums to outsell any new album
Jackson also became the first artist to have four of the top 20 best-selling albums in a single year in the US.

On March 16, 2010, following the surge in sales, Sony Music signed a $250 million deal with the Jackson estate to extend their distribution rights to Jackson's back catalog until at least 2017; it had been due to expire in 2015
It was the most expensive music contract for a single artist in history
They also agreed to release ten albums of previously unreleased material and new collections of released work
In 2017, Sony Music Entertainment extended its deal with the estate; that July, a Los Angeles court awarded Jones $9.4 million of disputed royalty payments for Off the Wall, Thriller and Bad
In July 2018, Sony/ATV bought the estate's stake in EMI for $287.5 million.

In 2014, Jackson became the first artist to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades
In December 2015, Thriller was certified for 30 million shipments by the RIAA, one of only two albums to do so in the US
A year later, it was certified at 33× platinum, after Soundscan added streams and audio downloads to album certifications.[nb 3]
Posthumous releases and productions

The first posthumous Jackson song, "This Is It", co-written in the 1980s with Paul Anka, was released in October 2009
The surviving Jackson brothers reunited to record backing vocals
On October 28, 2009, Sony released a documentary film about the rehearsals, Michael Jackson's This Is It
Despite a limited two-week engagement, it became the highest-grossing documentary or concert film ever, with earnings of more than $260 million worldwide
Jackson's estate received 90% of the profits
The film was accompanied by a compilation album of the same name
In late 2010, Sony released the first posthumous album, Michael and the promotional single "Breaking News"
Some doubt was cast upon whether the voice on some tracks was genuinely Jackson's.

Video game developer Ubisoft released a music video game featuring Jackson for the 2010 holiday season, Michael Jackson: The Experience; it was among the first games to use Kinect and PlayStation Move, the motion-detecting camera systems for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 respectively
Xscape, an album of unreleased material, was released on May 13, 2014
Later that year, Queen released three duets recorded with Jackson and Freddie Mercury in the 1980s
A compilation album, Scream, was released on September 29, 2017.

In October 2011, the theater company Cirque du Soleil launched Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour, a $57-million production, in Montreal, with a permanent show resident in Las Vegas
A larger and more theatrical Cirque show, Michael Jackson: One, designed for residency at the Mandalay Bay resort in Las Vegas, opened on May 23, 2013 in a renovated theater
A jukebox musical, Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough, is due to debut on Broadway in mid-2020
The musical is directed and choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon and features a book by Lynn Nottage
It was delayed and a pre-Broadway run in Chicago was canceled in the wake of the renewed claims of child sexual abuse.

In April 2011, Mohamed Al-Fayed, chairman of Fulham Football Club, unveiled a statue of Jackson outside the club stadium, Craven Cottage
It was moved to the National Football Museum in Manchester in May 2014, then removed from display in March 2019 following renewed sexual assault allegations.

In 2012, in an attempt to end a family dispute, Jackson's brother Jermaine retracted his signature on a public letter criticizing executors of Jackson's estate and his mother's advisers over the legitimacy of his brother's will
T.J
Jackson, son of Tito Jackson, was given co-guardianship of Michael Jackson's children after false reports of Katherine Jackson going missing.

In November 2019, it was reported that a Jackson biopic, produced by Bohemian Rhapsody (2018) producer Graham King, was in the works
Jackson's estate granted King the rights to his music and will work with King.
Leaving Neverland and posthumous child sexual abuse allegations
Main article: Leaving Neverland
A smiling Jackson wears a blue baseball cap and a red shirt
On his right are two women
One holds a pen, and one a small purse
On his left a young boy looks off-camera
He is dressed in a red shirt too
Jackson's hand is on his shoulder.
Jackson and Safechuck (right) in Honolulu, Hawaii (1988)

In 2013, choreographer Wade Robson filed a lawsuit alleging that Jackson had sexually abused him for seven years, beginning when he was seven years old
In 2014, a case was filed by James Safechuck, alleging sexual abuse over a four-year period from the age of ten
Both had testified in Jackson's defense during the 1993 allegations; Robson did so again in 2005
In 2015, Robson's case against Jackson's estate was dismissed on the grounds of being filed too late
Safechuck's claim was also time barred
In 2017, it was ruled that Jackson's corporations could not be held accountable for his alleged past actions
Their individual lawsuits are currently on appeal.

Robson and Safechuck and their stories became the subject of the documentary Leaving Neverland released in March 2019
The documentary covered their allegations of Jackson sexually abusing them in graphic detail, saying Jackson abused them "hundreds of times." Radio stations in New Zealand, Canada, the UK and the Netherlands removed Jackson's music from their playlists indefinitely
Jackson's family condemned the film as a "public lynching." The Jackson estate released a statement calling the film a "tabloid character assassination [Jackson] endured in life, and now in death"
The film drew criticism from Jackson fans
Close associates of Jackson, such as Corey Feldman, Aaron Carter, Brett Barnes, and Macaulay Culkin, said that Jackson had not molested them
In August 2019, a documentary "Chase the Truth" questioning the allegations made in "Leaving Neverland" was released.

At the same time, Jackson's albums rose in the charts following the documentary
Number Ones jumped to No
23 in the UK iTunes charts
The Essential Michael Jackson climbed to No
76; Thriller climbed to No
133 and Bad to No
142
Billboard senior editor Gail Mitchell said she and a colleague interviewed about thirty music executives who believed Jackson's legacy could withstand the controversy.

On February 21, the Jackson estate sued HBO for breaching a non-disparagement clause from a 1992 contract
The suit sought to compel HBO to participate in a non-confidential arbitration that could result in $100 million or more in damages rewarded to the estate
HBO said they did not breach a contract and filed an anti-SLAPP motion against the estate
On September 20, Judge George H
Wu denied HBO's motion to dismiss the case, allowing the Jackson estate to arbitrate.

In 2019, some New Zealand radio stations re-added some of Jackson's music to their playlists, citing "positive listener survey results".
Legacy and influence
See also: Cultural impact of Michael Jackson, List of Michael Jackson records and achievements, and List of artists influenced by Michael Jackson
A wall with colorful graffiti depicting Michael Jackson; once his full body dancing, then a close-up of his face.
Michael Jackson graffiti in Santa Cruz, California

Jackson has been referred to as the "King of Pop" because he transformed the art of music videos and paved the way for modern pop music
For much of Jackson's career, he had an unparalleled worldwide influence over the younger generation
His music and videos, such as Thriller, fostered racial diversity in MTV's roster and steered its focus from rock to pop music and R&B, shaping the channel into a form that proved enduring
He is recognized as the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time by Guinness World Records
He is considered one of the most significant cultural icons of the 20th century, and his contributions to music, dance, and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades.
Jackson's Bad era wax figure at Madame Tussauds

Danyel Smith, the chief content officer of Vibe Media Group and the editor-in-chief of Vibe describes Jackson as "The Greatest Star"
Huey calls Jackson "an unstoppable juggernaut, possessed of all the skills to dominate the charts seemingly at will: an instantly identifiable voice, eye-popping dance moves, stunning musical versatility and loads of sheer star power"
BET said Jackson was "quite simply the greatest entertainer of all time" and someone who "revolutionized the music video and brought dances like the moonwalk to the world
Jackson's sound, style, movement and legacy continues to inspire artists of all genres."

In 1984, Time magazine's pop critic Jay Cocks wrote that "Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles
He is the hottest single phenomenon since Elvis Presley
He just may be the most popular black singer ever." and described Jackson as a "Star of records, radio, rock video
A one-man rescue team for the music business
A songwriter who sets the beat for a decade
A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street
A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style, and color too." In 2003, The Daily Telegraph writer Tom Utley described Jackson as "extremely important" and a "genius"
In 2007, Jackson said: "Music has been my outlet, my gift to all of the lovers in this world
Through it, my music, I know I will live forever." At Jackson's memorial service on July 7, 2009, Motown founder Berry Gordy called Jackson "the greatest entertainer that ever lived"
In a June 28, 2009 Baltimore Sun article, Jill Rosen wrote that Jackson's legacy influenced fields including sound, dance, fashion, music videos and celebrity.

In 1992, Jackson was declared King of Sanwi, a traditional kingdom located in the south-east of Ivory Coast
In 2001, the MTV Video Vanguard Award was renamed in his honor
In July 2009, the Lunar Republic Society named a crater on the Moon after Jackson
In August, for what would have been Jackson's 51st birthday, Google dedicated their Google Doodle to him
In December, the American Film Institute recognized Jackson's death as a "moment of significance"
In 2010, two university librarians found that there were references to Jackson in academic writing on music, popular culture, chemistry and other topics
On December 19, 2014, the British Council of Cultural Relations deemed Jackson's life one of the 80 most important cultural moments of the 20th century
World Vitiligo Day has been celebrated on June 25, the anniversary of Jackson's death, to raise awareness of the auto-immune disorder that Jackson suffered from.

Robert Christgau wrote that Jackson's work from the 1970s to the early 1990s showed "immense originality, adaptability, and ambition" that "generate[d] genius beats, hooks, arrangements, and vocals (though not lyrics)"; music that "will stand forever as a reproach to the puritanical notion that pop music is slick or shallow and that's the end of it." During the 1990s as Jackson lost control of his "troubling life", his music suffered and began to shape "an arc not merely of promise fulfilled and outlived, but of something approaching tragedy: a phenomenally ebullient child star tops himself like none before, only to transmute audibly into a lost weirdo." Jackson's image by the 2000s—his "obsession with fame, his grotesque life magnified by his grotesque wealth"—had become what Christgau called "such an offense to rock aesthetes that the fact that he's a great musician is now often forgotten."
Artistry
Influences

Jackson was influenced by musicians including James Brown, Little Richard, Jackie Wilson, Diana Ross, Fred Astaire, Sammy Davis Jr., Gene Kelly, and David Ruffin
Little Richard had a substantial influence on Jackson, but Brown was his greatest inspiration; he later said that as a small child, his mother would waken him whenever Brown appeared on television
Jackson described being "mesmerized".

Jackson's vocal technique was influenced by Diana Ross; his use of the oooh interjection from a young age was something Ross had used on many of her songs with the Supremes
She was a mother figure to him, and he often watched her rehearse
He said he had learned a lot from watching how she moved and sang, and that she had encouraged him to have confidence in himself.

Choreographer David Winters, who met Jackson while choreographing the 1971 Diana Ross TV special Diana!, said that Jackson watched the musical West Side Story almost every week, and it was his favorite film; he paid tribute to it in "Beat It" and the "Bad" video.
Musicianship

Jackson had no formal music training and could not read or write music notation; he is credited for playing guitar, keyboard and drums, but was not proficient in them
When composing, he recorded ideas by beatboxing and imitating instruments vocally
Describing the process, he said: "I'll just sing the bass part into the tape recorder
I'll take that bass lick and put the chords of the melody over the bass lick and that's what inspires the melody." Engineer Robert Hoffman recalled Jackson dictating a guitar chord note by note and singing string arrangements part by part into a cassette recorder.
Themes and genres
Black and white photo of Jackson holding a microphone and singing.
Jackson in June 1988, in Vienna, during his Bad world tour

Jackson explored genres including pop, soul, rhythm and blues, funk, rock, disco, post-disco, dance-pop and new jack swing
Steve Huey of AllMusic wrote that Thriller refined the strengths of Off the Wall; the dance and rock tracks were more aggressive, while the pop tunes and ballads were softer and more soulful
Its tracks included the ballads "The Lady in My Life", "Human Nature", and "The Girl Is Mine", the funk pieces "Billie Jean" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'", and the disco set "Baby Be Mine" and "P.Y.T
(Pretty Young Thing)".

With Off the Wall, Jackson's "vocabulary of grunts, squeals, hiccups, moans, and asides" vividly showed his maturation into an adult, Robert Christgau wrote in Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies (1981)
The album's title track suggested to the critic a parallel between Jackson and Stevie Wonder's "oddball" music personas: "Since childhood his main contact with the real world has been on stage and in bed." With Thriller, Christopher Connelly of Rolling Stone commented that Jackson developed his long association with the subliminal theme of paranoia and darker imagery
AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted this on the songs "Billie Jean" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'"
In "Billie Jean", Jackson depicts an obsessive fan who alleges he has fathered her child, and in "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'" he argues against gossip and the media
"Beat It" decried gang violence in a homage to West Side Story, and was Jackson's first successful rock cross-over piece, according to Huey
He also observed that the title track "Thriller" began Jackson's interest with the theme of the supernatural, a topic he revisited in subsequent years
In 1985, Jackson co-wrote the charity anthem "We Are the World"; humanitarian themes later became a recurring theme in his lyrics and public persona.
	
"Thriller"
Menu
0:00
Jackson's song "Thriller", released as a single in 1984; Nelson George wrote that it uses cinematic sound effects, horror film motifs, and vocal trickery to convey a sense of danger.
"Smooth Criminal"
Menu
0:00
A single from the album Bad, released 1988, "Smooth Criminal" features digital drum sounds, keyboard bass, and other percussion elements; George said it gave the impression of a pulsing heart.
"Black or White"
Menu
0:00
The lead single from Dangerous, "Black or White" is a danceable rock song with hard rock elements.
Problems playing these files? See media help.

In Bad, Jackson's concept of the predatory lover is seen on the rock song "Dirty Diana"
The lead single "I Just Can't Stop Loving You" is a traditional love ballad, and "Man in the Mirror" is a ballad of confession and resolution
"Smooth Criminal" is an evocation of bloody assault, rape and likely murder
AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine states that Dangerous presents Jackson as a paradoxical person
The first half of the record is dedicated to new jack swing, including songs like "Jam" and "Remember the Time"
It was the first Jackson album in which social ills became a primary theme; "Why You Wanna Trip on Me", for example, protests world hunger, AIDS, homelessness and drugs
Dangerous contains sexually charged songs such as "In the Closet"
The title track continues the theme of the predatory lover and compulsive desire
The second half includes introspective, pop-gospel anthems such as "Will You Be There", "Heal the World" and "Keep the Faith"
In the ballad "Gone Too Soon", Jackson gives tribute to Ryan White and the plight of those with AIDS.

HIStory creates an atmosphere of paranoia
In the new jack swing-funk rock tracks "Scream" and "Tabloid Junkie", and the R&B ballad "You Are Not Alone", Jackson retaliates against the injustice and isolation he feels, and directs his anger at the media
In the introspective ballad "Stranger in Moscow", Jackson laments his "fall from grace"; "Earth Song", "Childhood", "Little Susie" and "Smile" are operatic pop songs
In the "D.S.", Jackson launched a verbal attack against the lawyer Tom Sneddon, who had prosecuted him in both child sexual abuse cases
He describes Sneddon as an antisocial white supremacist who wanted to "get my ass, dead or alive"
Sneddon said he had not listened to the song
Invincible was produced by Rodney Jerkins
It includes urban soul tracks such as "Cry" and "The Lost Children", ballads such as "Speechless", "Break of Dawn", and "Butterflies" and mixes hip hop, pop, and R&B in "2000 Watts", "Heartbreaker" and "Invincible".
Vocal style

Jackson sang from childhood, and over time his voice and vocal style changed
Between 1971 and 1975, his voice descended from boy soprano to high tenor
He was known for his vocal range
With the arrival of Off the Wall in the late 1970s, Jackson's abilities as a vocalist were well regarded; Rolling Stone compared his vocals to the "breathless, dreamy stutter" of Stevie Wonder, and wrote that "Jackson's feathery-timbred tenor is extraordinarily beautiful
It slides smoothly into a startling falsetto that's used very daringly." By the time of 1982's Thriller, Rolling Stone wrote that Jackson was singing in a "fully adult voice" that was "tinged by sadness".

The turn of the 1990s saw the release of the introspective album Dangerous
The New York Times noted that on some tracks, "he gulps for breath, his voice quivers with anxiety or drops to a desperate whisper, hissing through clenched teeth" and he had a "wretched tone"
When singing of brotherhood or self-esteem the musician would return to "smooth" vocals
Of Invincible, Rolling Stone wrote that, at 43, Jackson still performed "exquisitely voiced rhythm tracks and vibrating vocal harmonies"
Joseph Vogel notes Jackson's ability to use non-verbal sounds to express emotion
Neil McCormick wrote that Jackson's unorthodox singing style "was original and utterly distinctive".
Music videos and choreography

Jackson released "Thriller", a 14-minute music video directed by John Landis, in 1983
The zombie-themed video "defined music videos and broke racial barriers" on MTV, which had launched two years earlier
Before Thriller, Jackson struggled to receive coverage on MTV, allegedly because he was African American
Pressure from CBS Records persuaded MTV to start showing "Billie Jean" and later "Beat It", which led to a lengthy partnership with Jackson, and helped other black music artists gain recognition
The popularity of his videos on MTV helped the relatively new channel's viewing figures, and MTV's focus shifted toward pop and R&B
His performance on Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever changed the scope of live stage shows, making it acceptable for artists to lip-sync to music video on stage
The choreography in Thriller has been copied in Indian films and prisons in the Philippines
Thriller marked an increase in scale for music videos, and was named the most successful music video ever by the Guinness World Records.

In "Bad"'s 19-minute video—directed by Martin Scorsese—Jackson used sexual imagery and choreography, and touched his chest, torso and crotch
When asked by Winfrey in the 1993 interview about why he grabbed his crotch, he said it was spontaneously compelled by the music
Time magazine described the "Bad" video as "infamous"
It featured Wesley Snipes; Jackson's later videos often featured famous cameo roles
For the "Smooth Criminal" video, Jackson experimented with leaning forward at a 45 degree angle, beyond the performer's center of gravity
To accomplish this live, Jackson and designers developed a special shoe to lock the performer's feet to the stage, allowing them to lean forward
They were granted U.S
Patent 5,255,452 for the device
The video for "Leave Me Alone" was not officially released in the US, but in 1989 was nominated for three Billboard Music Video Awards and won a Golden Lion Award for its special effects
It won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.

He received the MTV Video Vanguard Award in 1988; in 2001 the award was renamed in his honor
The "Black or White" video simultaneously premiered on November 14, 1991, in 27 countries with an estimated audience of 500 million people, the largest audience ever for a music video at the time
Along with Jackson, it featured Macaulay Culkin, Peggy Lipton, and George Wendt
It helped introduce morphing to music videos
It was controversial for scenes in which Jackson rubs his crotch, vandalizes cars, and throws a garbage can through a storefront
He apologized and removed the final scene of the video.

"In the Closet" featured Naomi Campbell in a courtship dance with Jackson
"Remember the Time" was set in ancient Egypt, and featured Eddie Murphy, Iman, and Magic Johnson
The video for "Scream", directed by Mark Romanek and production designer Tom Foden, gained a record 11 MTV Video Music Award Nominations, and won "Best Dance Video", "Best Choreography", and "Best Art Direction"
The song and its video are Jackson's response to being accused of child molestation in 1993
A year later, it won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form
It has been reported as the most expensive music video ever made, at $7 million; Romanek has contradicted this
The "Earth Song" video was nominated for the 1997 Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.

Michael Jackson's Ghosts, a short film written by Jackson and Stephen King and directed by Stan Winston, premiered at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival
At over 38 minutes long, it held the Guinness world record for the longest music video until 2013, when it was eclipsed by Pharrell Williams' "Happy"
The 2001 video for "You Rock My World" lasts over 13 minutes, was directed by Paul Hunter, and features Chris Tucker and Marlon Brando
It won an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Music Video in 2002.

In December 2009, the Library of Congress selected "Thriller" as the only music video to be preserved in the National Film Registry, as a work of "enduring importance to American culture"
Huey wrote that Jackson transformed the music video into an art form and a promotional tool through complex story lines, dance routines, special effects and famous cameos, while breaking down racial barriers.
Honors and awards
See also: List of awards and nominations received by Michael Jackson
Thriller platinum record on display at the Hard Rock Cafe, Hollywood in Universal City, California

Jackson was inducted onto the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1980 as a member of the Jacksons, and in 1984 as a solo artist
He also won the World Music Awards' Best-Selling Pop Male Artist of the Millennium, the American Music Award's Artist of the Century Award and the Bambi Pop Artist of the Millennium Award
He was inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of The Jackson 5 in 1997, and again as a solo artist in 2001
In 2002 he was added to the Songwriters Hall of Fame
In 2010, Jackson was the first pop and rock 'n' roll performer inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame, and in 2014 he was posthumously inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame.

Jackson won hundreds of awards, more than any other popular music recording artist
His awards include many Guinness world records (eight in 2006 alone), including Most Successful Entertainer of All Time, 13 Grammy Awards the Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, and a record 26 American Music Awards (including the "Artist of the Century" and "Artist of the 1980s").—13 number-one singles in the US in his solo career—more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era—and estimated sales of over 350 million records worldwide[Note 1] making him one of the best-selling artists in music history.

Jackson received an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Fisk University in 1988
On December 29, 2009, the American Film Institute recognized Jackson's death as a "moment of significance".
Earnings

In 1989, Jackson's annual earnings from album sales, endorsements, and concerts were estimated at $125 million
Forbes placed Jackson's annual income at $35 million in 1996 and $20 million in 1997
Estimates of Jackson's net worth during his life range from negative $285 million to positive $350 million for 2002, 2003 and 2007
Forbes reported in August 2018 that Jackson's total career pretax earnings in life and death were $4.2 billion
Sales of his recordings through Sony's music unit earned him an estimated $300 million in royalties
He may have earned another $400 million from concerts, music publishing (including his share of the Beatles catalog), endorsements, merchandising and music videos.

In 2013, the executors of Jackson's estate filed a petition in the United States Tax Court as a result of a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) over US federal estate taxes
The executors claim that it was worth about $7 million, the IRS that it was worth over $1.1 billion
In February 2014, the IRS reported that Jackson's estate owed $702 million; $505 million in taxes, and $197 million in penalties
A trial was held from February 6 to 24, 2017, and a decision is expected in 2019.

In 2016, Forbes estimated annual gross earnings by the Jackson Estate at $825 million, the largest ever recorded for a celebrity, mostly due to the sale of the Sony/ATV catalog
In 2018 the figure was $400 million
It was the eighth year since his death that Jackson's annual earnings were reported to be over $100 million
In 2018 Forbes reported Jackson's earnings to be $400 million, thus bringing Jackson’s postmortem total to $2.4 billion
In 2019, Forbes recognized Jackson as the top-earning dead celebrity each year since his death except 2012.
Discography
Main articles: Michael Jackson albums discography and Michael Jackson singles discography
See also: The Jackson 5 discography

    Got to Be There (1972)
    Ben (1972)
    Music & Me (1973)
    Forever, Michael (1975)
    Off the Wall (1979)
    Thriller (1982)
    Bad (1987)
    Dangerous (1991)
    HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995)
    Invincible (2001)

Filmography
See also: Michael Jackson videography

    The Wiz (1978)
    Captain EO (1986)
    Moonwalker (1988)
    Michael Jackson's Ghosts (1997)
    Men in Black II (2002)
    Miss Cast Away and the Island Girls (2004)
    Michael Jackson's This Is It (2009)
    Bad 25 (2012)
    Michael Jackson: The Last Photo Shoot (2014)
    Michael Jackson's Journey from Motown to Off the Wall (2016)

Tours
Main article: List of concert tours by Michael Jackson and the Jackson 5

    Bad (1987–1989)
    Dangerous World Tour (1992–1993)
    HIStory World Tour (1996–1997)
    MJ & Friends (1999)

Notes

"I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana".
The Wall Street Journal and other news sites report that the 750 million units sold by Michael Jackson is an inflated figure, initially claimed in 2006 by Raymone Bain, Jackson's publicist at that time, without any evidence and probably in an effort to boost album sales
Since 2006, several sources such as RIAA, Rolling Stone, and Time have claimed that Michael Jackson has sold 750 million units (or even 1 billion); Adrian Strain, a representative from the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) has disputed this figure.

    In 2018, its US sales record was overtaken by the Eagles' album Greatest Hits 1971–75, with 38× platinum.

References
Citations

Bain, Raymone K
(October 31, 2006)
"Statement from Raymone Bain to all fans and fanclubs"
Mjtmc.com
Archived from the original on February 17, 2007.
Lara, David (May 12, 2012)
"Michael Jackson's 'Bad' Gets a Revamp and More Inflated Sales!"
ImpreMedia
Retrieved January 17, 2013.
Bialik, Carl (July 15, 2009)
"Spun: The Off-the-Wall Accounting of Record Sales"
The Wall Street Journal
Retrieved January 17, 2013.
"Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' First Ever 30X Multi-Platinum RIAA Certification"
Recording Industry Association of America
December 16, 2015
Retrieved December 18, 2015.
Grow, Kory (December 16, 2015)
"Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Is First Album to Sell 30 Million Copies"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved May 29, 2016.
Adamczyk, Alicia (December 16, 2015)
"Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Just Smashed Another Record"
Time
Retrieved May 29, 2016.
County of Los Angeles Department of Health Services (2009)
Michael Jackson death certificate.
Huey, Steve
"Michael Jackson – Artist Biography"
AllMusic
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Barnes, Brokes (June 25, 2009)
"A Star Idolized and Haunted, Michael Jackson Dies at 50"
The New York Times
Retrieved July 12, 2009.
"Michael Jackson: 10 Achievements That Made Him The King of Pop"
Grammy.com
June 24, 2014
Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jackson 2009, p
26.
Young 2009, p
18.
Young 2009, pp
17, 19.
Petridis, Alexis (June 27, 2018)
"Joe Jackson was one of the most monstrous fathers in pop"
The Guardian
Retrieved April 18, 2019.
Sweeting, Adam (June 27, 2018)
"Joe Jackson obituary"
The Guardian
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Young 2009, pp
18–19.
Knopper 2016, p
6.
Morris, Chris (June 27, 2018)
"Joe Jackson, Jackson Family Patriarch, Dies at 89"
Variety
Retrieved April 27, 2019.
"Can Michael Jackson's demons be explained?"
BBC News Online
June 27, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson interview seen by 14 m"
BBC News Online
February 4, 2003
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Lewis Jones 2005, pp
165–168.
Katherine Jackson: Michael's strict upbringing not abuse (video)
CNN
May 15, 2012
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Duke, Alan (July 21, 2009)
"Joe Jackson denies abusing Michael" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson Brothers: Was Joe Jackson Abusive?"
Yahoo! Celebrity
Archived from the original on May 22, 2015
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Young 2009, p
24.
"Michael Jackson: a life of highs and lows"
The Daily Telegraph
June 26, 2009
Retrieved November 28, 2019.
Jackson, Jermaine (2011)
You Are Not Alone: Michael: Through a Brother's Eyes
Simon & Schuster
p
41
ISBN 978-1-4516-5156-0.
Burton, Charlie (February 7, 2018)
"Inside the Jackson machine"
GQ
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
13–14.
Young 2009, pp
21–22.
"Triumph & Tragedy: The Life of Michael Jackson"
Rolling Stone India
August 25, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Young 2009, p
22.
Young 2009, p
21.
Knopper, Steve (July 23, 2017)
"Bobby Taylor, Motown Singer Who Discovered Jackson 5, Dead at 83"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved July 1, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
59–69.
Harper, Phillip Brian (Winter 1989)
"Synesthesia, "Crossover," and Blacks in Popular Music"
Social Text (23): 110
JSTOR 466423.
Easlea, Daryl (October 15, 2016)
Michael Jackson: Rewind: The Life and Legacy of Pop Music's King
Race Point Publishing
p
178
ISBN 1-63106-253-0.
"Michael Jackson – Biography"
Rolling Stone
Archived from the original on April 2, 2008.
Bronson, Fred (November 15, 2017)
"48 Years Ago Today, 'I Want You Back' Kicked It All Off for the Jackson 5"
Billboard
Retrieved April 6, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
81–82.
Young 2009, p
25.
McNulty, Bernadette (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's music: the solo albums"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
98–99.
Alban, Debra (June 28, 2009)
"Michael Jackson broke down racial barriers" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Brown, Helen (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson and Motown: the boy behind the marketing"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Mansour 2005, p
403: 'The Robot was a mimelike dance, popularized by The Jackson 5 and their Top Ten hit "Dancing Machine"'
Huey, Steve
"The Jackson – Artist Biography"
AllMusic
Retrieved April 8, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
138–144.
"The Jackson 5 Biography"
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Gibron, Bill (July 7, 2009)
"You Can't Win Michael Jackson and 'The Wiz'"
PopMatters
Retrieved May 10, 2017.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
178–179.
Bronson 2003, p
207.
"Who's bad? Michael Jackson's estate owes Quincy Jones $9.4m in royalties, jury decides"
The Guardian
Associated Press
July 27, 2017
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Leight, Elias (February 5, 2015)
"10 Things We Learned From Spike Lee's Michael Jackson Doc"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved January 27, 2017.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
205–210.
Trust, Gary (January 21, 2018)
"Ask Billboard: Remembering the Time When Michael Jackson Kept Hitting the Hot 100's Top 10, From 'Thriller' to 'Dangerous'"
Billboard
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
"Michael Jackson: Off The Wall"
Virgin Media
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Donna Summer and Michael Jackson sweep Annual American Music Awards"
The Ledger
Associated Press
January 20, 1980
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Peters, Ida (February 2, 1980)
"Donna No
1, Pop and Soul; Michael Jackson King of Soul"
The Afro-American
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson"
Grammy.com
February 15, 2019
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
"Few Surprises In Music Awards"
Sarasota Herald-Tribune
Associated Press
February 1, 1981
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
188.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
191.
Locker, Melissa (July 29, 2013)
"Michael Jackson and Freddie Mercury: Three Duets Coming Out This Fall"
Time
Retrieved June 26, 2015.
"The real Freddie Mercury: why the Queen biopic only tells part of the story"
The Times
October 19, 2018
Retrieved October 30, 2018.
Greene, Andy (September 19, 2014)
"Hear Michael Jackson and Freddie Mercury's Long-Lost Duet"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved April 26, 2016.
Earls, John (August 2, 2014)
"Producer of new Queen album featuring Freddie Mercury and Michael Jackson vocals is revealed"
NME
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Michael: He's Not Just the Rock Star of the Year, He's the Rock Star of the '80s"
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 20, 1983
Retrieved July 5, 2010.
"Cash register's ring sweet music to record industry"
The Gadsden Times
Associated Press
March 26, 1984
Retrieved July 5, 2010.
"Diamond Awards"
Recording Industry Association of America
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Best-selling album"
Guinness World Records
May 11, 2017
Retrieved January 26, 2018.
Lewis Jones 2005, p
47.
Williams, Janette (June 24, 2009)
"Michael Jackson left indelible mark on Pasadena"
Whittier Daily News
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Fatal Cardiac Arrest Strikes Michael Jackson"
Emmys.com
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson glove sells for $350,000"
BBC News Online
November 22, 2009
Retrieved April 19, 2019.
Daniel, Jeffrey (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson 1958–2009"
Time
Retrieved April 19, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
234–237.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
238–241.
Kisselgoff, Anna (March 6, 1988)
"Stage: The Dancing Feet Of Michael Jackson"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Berry Gordy Addresses Michael Jackson Memorial Service"
Hark
Archived from the original on May 9, 2013
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Past Winners Search: Bruce Swedien"
The Recording Academy
Retrieved February 14, 2008.
"Michael Jackson sweeps American Music Awards"
Daily News
Associated Press
January 17, 1984
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
"Winners Database: Search Results for "Michael Jackson""
American Music Award
Retrieved July 18, 2018.
Cocks, Jay (March 19, 1984)
"Why He's a Thriller"
Time
Retrieved April 25, 2010.
Pareles, Jon (January 14, 1984)
"Michael Jackson at 25: A Musical Phenomenon"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Herrera, Monica (July 3, 2009)
"Michael Jackson, Pepsi Made Marketing History"
Billboard
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Story, Louise (December 31, 2007)
"Philip B
Dusenberry, 71, Adman, Dies"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
279–287.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
304–307.
"Drunk Driving Prevention (1983 – Present)"
Advertising Education Foundation
2003
Archived from the original on May 9, 2015
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
320.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
314–320.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
312–314.
"Past Winners Search: "We Are The World""
The Recording Academy
Retrieved January 29, 2014.
Doyle, Jack (July 7, 2009)
""Michael & McCartney": 1980s–2009"
The Pop History Dig
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Breznican, Anthony (June 30, 2009)
"The many faces of Michael Jackson"
USA Today
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
"Bruce shows who's Boss"
Montreal Gazette
Associated Press
January 28, 1986
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
Campbell 1993, p
114.
Young 2009, pp
340–344.
Hilburn, Robert (September 22, 1985)
"The long and winding road"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Paul McCartney refused an offer to buy the ATV Catalog for £20 million ($40 million)"
Mjjinfo.blogspot.fr
November 13, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
333–338.
"Michael Jackson 1958–2009"
Today Tonight
June 25, 2009
Coverage of the sale of ATV Music at 2:36 minutes in
Retrieved January 12, 2011.
Campbell 1995, pp
14–16.
Parameswaran 2011, pp
75–77.
DeMello 2012, p
152.
Rosenberg, Alyssa (February 2, 2016)
"To understand Michael Jackson and his skin, you have to go beyond race"
The Washington Post
Retrieved September 17, 2019.
Wilson, Jeff (February 12, 1993)
"The Aftermath of Michael Jackson and Oprah: What About His Face?" (Press release)
Associated Press
Retrieved September 17, 2019.
Kolata, Gina (February 13, 1993)
"Doctor Says Michael Jackson Has a Skin Disease"
The New York Times
Retrieved September 17, 2019.
Kreps, Daniel (March 29, 2010)
"Search of Michael Jackson's Home Revealed Skin-Whitening Creams"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved September 17, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
434–436.
"The Michael Jackson Interview: Oprah Reflects"
The Oprah Winfrey Show
September 16, 2009
p
3
Retrieved April 24, 2017.
"Arnold Klein, Dermatologist Who Smoothed Stars' Wrinkles, Dies at 70"
The New York Times
The Associated Press
October 10, 2015
Retrieved July 18, 2019.
Jackson 2009, pp
229–230.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
312–313.
"Michael Jackson was addicted to plastic surgery, his mother says"
The Sydney Morning Herald
November 10, 2010
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Music's misunderstood superstar"
BBC News Online
June 13, 2005
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Durkee, Cutler (September 14, 1987)
"Unlike Anyone, Even Himself"
People
Vol
28 no
11
Retrieved June 29, 2019.
Goldberg, Michael; Handelman, David (September 24, 1987)
"Is Michael Jackson for Real?"
Rolling Stone.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
355–361.
"Jackson Ups Bid for Skeleton of 'Elephant Man'"
Chicago Tribune
United Press International
June 17, 1987
Retrieved June 20, 2019.
Jackson, Michael (September 12, 1997)
"Jackson interview with Barbara Walters"
20/20 (Interview)
Interviewed by Barbara Walters
ABC.
Vogel, Joseph (September 9, 2012)
"How Michael Jackson Made 'Bad'"
The Atlantic
Retrieved July 20, 2019.
Bevil, Dewayne (June 30, 2010)
"What's old is new again as 'Captain EO' returns to Epcot"
Orlando Sentinel
Retrieved April 6, 2019.
"Captain EO is Back to Change the World"
IGN
February 23, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Johnson, Robert E
(September 1987)
"Michael Jackson Comes Back!"
Ebony
Vol
42 no
11
pp
143, 148–9
ISSN 0012-9011.
Jackson, Katherine (October 1990)
"Mother of Jackson Family Tells All"
Ebony
Vol
45 no
12
p
66
ISSN 0012-9011
"In 1987, he left the Jehovah's Witnesses
There was strong opposition to his "Thriller" video on the part of some Witnesses
Perhaps the controversy figured into his decision to leave
But I don't know that for a fact because I didn't talk to him about what he'd done
I couldn't
Witnesses do not discuss spiritual matters with a person who has disassociated himself from the Witnesses, including family members
But I want to stress that, contrary to published reports, I was not required to "shun" my son
Our relationship is as loving today as it was when he was a Witness
I just can't ask him, "Why, Michael?""
"I Would Never Do It Again!"
Awake
Jehovah's Witnesses
May 22, 1984
p
20
Retrieved September 11, 2018.
Cocks, Jay (September 14, 1987)
"Music: The Badder They Come"
Time
Retrieved April 25, 2010.
"Michael, Travis top Music Award winners"
Lodi News-Sentinel
UPI
January 30, 1989
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
"Jackson tour on its way to u.s." San Jose Mercury News
January 12, 1988
Retrieved July 5, 2010.
"50 fastest selling albums ever"
NME
April 27, 2011
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Sinha-Roy, Piya (May 21, 2012)
"Michael Jackson is still "Bad," 25 years after album" (Press release)
Reuters.
Lewis Jones 2005, pp
95–96.
Harrington, Richard (January 12, 1988)
"Jackson to Make First Solo U.S
Tour"
The Washington Post
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
"16 of Michael Jackson's Greatest Non-Musical Achievements"
Brainz.org
Archived from the original on June 26, 2015
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Vincent, Alice (March 11, 2019)
"When Michael Jackson (almost) told all: the story of his bizarre autobiography Moonwalk"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved April 8, 2019.
Shanahan, Mark; Golstein, Meredith (June 27, 2009)
"Remembering Michael"
The Boston Globe
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Best Seller List a Cakewalk for Moonwalk" (Press release)
Associated Press
May 6, 1988
Retrieved April 8, 2019.
Jackson 2009, pp
29–31.
Ditzian, Eric (October 12, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Memoir, 'Moonwalk': Read Excerpts Here!"
MTV
Retrieved June 20, 2019.
"Michael Jackson's Moonwalker at 25"
Clash
November 7, 2013
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Entertainment Notes: Moonwalker Tops Thriller"
Deseret News
February 6, 1989
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Gold & Platinum"
RIAA
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Michael Jackson's Neverland on sale"
Times of Malta
Reuters
June 1, 2015
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
"Michael Jackson – Biography"
Rolling Stone
Archived from the original on June 20, 2008.
Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (August 1, 2014)
"Michael Jackson Neverland Ranch expected to fetch up to $85m"
The Guardian
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
Mull, Marison (May 6, 1988)
"Pepsi Ads to Run on Soviet TV"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Tannenbaum & Marks 2011, Chapter 41, "I Want to Have a Nickname".
Browne, David (June 25, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Black or White"
Entertainment Weekly
Retrieved April 14, 2019
" highly placed source at MTV says the network was obligated to refer to Jackson on air as the King of Pop in order to be allowed to show "Black or White." An MTV spokeswoman denies that, but the phrase was part of MTV's ads for the video and was repeatedly used by its VJs
A source at Fox confirms that Jackson's people did request that Bart use the phrase "King of Pop" in the video and that the phrase also be used in the network's press releases; 'King of Pop' also crops up in Fox's print ads for the video and in press releases by Jackson's publicists, Solters/Roskin/Friedman."
Campbell 1993, pp
260–263.
"Remarks on the Upcoming Summit With President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union"
Presidency.ucsb.edu
April 5, 1990
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Blacks Who Give Something Back"
Ebony
Vol
45 no
3
March 1990
p
68
ISSN 0012-9011.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
382.
Montgomery, James (July 6, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Life & Legacy: The Eccentric King Of Pop (1986–1999)"
MTV.
Gray, Chris; Shah, Saeed (October 3, 2002)
"Robbie swings historic record deal with EMI"
The Independent
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Willman, Chris (November 24, 1991)
"Michael Jackson's 'Dangerous'"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
"Gold & Platinum Searchable Database – Jackson, Michael"
Recording Industry Association of America
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Carter, Kelley L
(August 10, 2008)
"5 Things You Can Learn About ..
New jack swing"
Chicago Tribune
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"The return of the King of Pop"
Today
November 2, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson Chart History"
Billboard.
"Garth Brooks ropes in most Billboard awards"
The Beaver County Times
Associated Press
December 10, 1992
Retrieved July 4, 2010.
"Jackson Shows Up to Gather Awards, Despite Ankle Injury"
Los Angeles Times
March 11, 1993
ISSN 0458-3035
Retrieved July 16, 2019.
"Michael Jackson"
Official Charts Company
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
Harrington, Richard (February 5, 1992)
"Jackson to Tour Overseas"
The Washington Post
Archived from the original on September 24, 2015.
Zad, Martie (October 4, 1992)
"Michael Jackson Concert from Bucharest on HBO Saturday"
The Washington Post
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
452–454.
"Stars line up for Clinton celebration"
Los Angeles Daily News
January 19, 1993.
Smith, Patricia (January 20, 1992)
"Facing the music and the masses at the presidential gala"
The Boston Globe.
Stuart, Tessa; Spanos, Britanny; Grow, Kory (January 19, 2017)
"From Dylan to Beyonce: Most Legendary Inauguration Performances"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Michael Jackson: Crowned in Africa, Pop Music King Tells Real Story Of Controversial Trip"
Ebony
Vol
47 no
5
May 1992
pp
34–43
ISSN 0012-9011.
Sandomir, Richard (June 29, 2009)
"How Jackson Redefined the Super Bowl"
The New York Times
Retrieved June 8, 2013.
Rosenthal, Phil (February 6, 2011)
"Goal of spectacle colors NFL's thinking about Super Bowl halftime show"
Chicago Tribune
Retrieved January 20, 2017.
"Cyrus, Bolton please the fans"
Toledo Blade
Associated Press
January 27, 1993
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
Rosen, Craig (February 6, 1993)
"Michael Jackson Cops 3 Top Prizes"
Billboard
Vol
105 no
6
p
12
ISSN 0006-2510.
McShane, Larry (February 25, 1983)
"Grammy moments – memorable and forgettable"
Deseret News
p
C3
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"1993: Michael Jackson accused of child abuse"
BBC News Online
February 8, 2003
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
496–498.
Sullivan, Randall (2012)
"South"
Untouchable: The Strange Life & Tragic Death of Michael Jackson
Grove Press
ISBN 978-0-8021-4582-6.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
477–478.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
534–540.
Broder, John M
(April 30, 2005)
"Jackson's Books About Boys Are Allowed as Evidence in Trial"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Photos May Contradict Michael's Accuser"
USA Today
May 2, 1994
Archived from the original on April 28, 2015
Retrieved April 21, 2019.
Halperin, Ian (2009)
Unmasked: The Final Years of Michael Jackson
Simon & Schuster
ISBN 978-1-4391-7719-8.
Ebert, John David (2010)
Dead Celebrities, Living Icons: Tragedy and Fame in the Age of the Multimedia Superstar
Praeger
p
201
ISBN 978-0-313-37764-8.
Mankiewicz, Josh (September 3, 2004)
"New details about 1993 Jackson case" (Press release)
NBC News.
"Jackson's 'past' allowed in court"
BBC News Online
March 29, 2005
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Mydans, Seth (September 22, 1994)
"No Charges for Now Against Michael Jackson"
The New York Times
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Warrant Allows a Strip Search of Jackson"
Deseret News
Associated Press
November 16, 1993
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Philips, Chuck; Newton, Jim (November 13, 1993)
"Jackson Ends World Tour, Cites Painkiller Addiction"
Los Angeles Times
Archived from the original on April 18, 2019
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
518–520.
Fenton, Matthew McCann (May 30, 2001)
"Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley wed"
Entertainment Weekly
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"She's out of his life" (Press release)
CNN
January 18, 1996
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
580–581.
Schodolski, Vincent J
(January 19, 1996)
"After 20 Months, Jackson and Presley Agree to Divorce"
Chicago Tribune
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Top 100 Albums"
Recording Industry Association of America
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson's best selling studio albums"
The Daily Telegraph
June 26, 2009
Retrieved June 11, 2015.
Pareles, Jon (June 18, 1995)
"Pop View; Michael Jackson Is Angry, Understand?"
The New York Times
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"News – Jackson receives his World Records"
Yahoo!
November 14, 2006
Archived from the original on September 27, 2011.
Weinraub, Bernard (June 15, 1995)
"In New Lyrics, Jackson Uses Slurs"
The New York Times
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"ADL Welcomes Michael Jackson's Decision To Remove Anti-Semitic Lyrics From Song"
Anti-Defamation League
June 22, 1995
Archived from the original on October 1, 2012
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
576–577.
"Company News; Michael Jackson sells rights to Beatles songs to Sony"
The New York Times
Associated Press
November 8, 1995
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Leeds, Jeff; Sorkin, Andrew Ross (April 13, 2006)
"Michael Jackson Bailout Said to Be Close"
The New York Times
Retrieved July 23, 2008.
Myers, Justin (December 14, 2018)
"The best-selling singles of all time on the Official UK Chart"
Official Charts Company
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
McKie, John (February 21, 1996)
"Brits brawl as Cocker 'pulps' Jackson chorus"
The Independent
Retrieved April 6, 2019.
"Brit Awards: Brits behaving badly"
BBC News Online
March 4, 2000
Retrieved April 6, 2019.
Christensen, Thor (January 30, 1996)
"Brooks turns down award for favorite artist of the year"
Rome News-Tribune
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
570–586.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
580–581, 597.
"Jackson child custody fight ends"
BBC News Online
September 30, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Rojek 2007, p
74.
Burkeman, Oliver (July 7, 2002)
"Jacko gets tough: but is he a race crusader or just a falling star?"
The Guardian
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Ricky Martin, Mariah Carey, Michael Jackson, Others To Join Pavarotti For Benefit"
VH1
MTV Networks
May 5, 1999
Archived from the original on October 18, 2011
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Slash, Scorpions, Others Scheduled For "Michael Jackson & Friends""
VH1
MTV Networks
May 27, 1999
Archived from the original on February 21, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Rozhon, Tracie (November 16, 2000)
"Big Deal; An Old Chagall Haunt, Repainted"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Basham, David (January 18, 2000)
"Lauryn Hill, Backstreet Boys, DMX Honored With American Music Awards"
MTV
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Orth, Maureen (April 2003)
"Losing His Grip"
Vanity Fair
Archived from the original on March 6, 2008.
Aiese, Eric
"Billboard: Michael Jackson Concert Review"
Classicwhitney.com
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
"Jackson's CBS Special Moonwalks Over Rivals"
Billboard
November 15, 2001
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
614–617.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
610–611.
"Keys, Destiny's Child, McGraw win at American Music Awards"
Lodi News-Sentinel
Associated Press
January 10, 2002
Retrieved June 16, 2010.
Chonin, Neva (January 11, 2002)
"Awards recognize popular success / Keys, Destiny's win as expected"
San Francisco Chronicle
Retrieved June 12, 2019.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
599–600.
Vineyard, Jennifer (November 20, 2002)
"Michael Jackson Calls Baby-Dangling Incident A 'Terrible Mistake'"
MTV
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
D'Angelo, Joe (February 4, 2002)
"Jackson sued by promoter for attempting world tour without him"
MTV
Retrieved June 12, 2019.
Overend, William (March 21, 2003)
"Officials Revisit Tax Break for Jackson's Neverland as Cattle Ranch"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved June 12, 2019.
"Jackson's Legal Troubles"
The Wall Street Journal
June 13, 2005
Retrieved June 12, 2019.
Silverman, Stephen M
(May 10, 2004)
"Jackson Settles Old Lawsuit Against Him"
People
Retrieved June 12, 2019.
"Michael Jackson Brands Recording Industry As Racist"
Billboard
July 8, 2002
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Jackson, Jermaine (December 31, 2002)
"Interview with Jermaine Jackson"
Connie Chung Tonight (Interview)
Interviewed by Connie Chung
CNN
Retrieved July 2, 2008.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
640.
Davies, Hugh (February 4, 2003)
"Jackson has children in his room for 'sleep-overs'"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Living with Michael Jackson (television)
ITV
February 6, 2003
Event occurs at 0:51
"Who's the criminal? Who's the jack-the-ripper in the room?..
I'm sleeping on a sleeping bag on the floor
I give him the bed, 'cause he has a brother named Star
So him and Star took the bed
And I'm on the floor on the sleeping bag."
Broder, John M
(December 19, 2003)
"Jackson Is Formally Charged With Child Molesting"
The New York Times
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Madigan, Nick; Neilan, Terence (January 16, 2004)
"Michael Jackson Pleads Not Guilty to Molestation Charges"
The New York Times
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Davis, Matthews (June 6, 2005)
"Trial health problems for Jackson"
BBC News Online
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson cleared of child molestation"
The Guardian
Associated Press
June 13, 2005
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson: The fantastic possessions revealed"
The Independent
Reuters
June 26, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Toumi, Habib (January 23, 2006)
"Jackson settles down to his new life in the Gulf"
Gulf News
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jermaine Jackson reveals escape plan for Michael"
The Washington Times
Associated Press
September 10, 2011
Retrieved February 10, 2019.
"Certified Awards"
British Phonographic Industry
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson strikes deal over loans"
BBC News Online
April 14, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson Closes Neverland House"
CBS News
July 6, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson Sails With Two Seas"
Billboard
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson parts with Bahrain label"
BBC News Online
September 26, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Friedman, Roger (October 21, 2006)
"Who's Funding Jackson's Retreat to Irish Recording Studio?"
Fox News Channel
Archived from the original on September 1, 2009
Retrieved August 24, 2009.
Maher, Rebecca (October 9, 2015)
"Michael Jackson's Irish doctor releases memoir"
Irish Examiner
Retrieved August 30, 2017.
"Dr
Patrick Treacy's New Book : "Behind The Mask" (the Irishman who became Michael Jackson's doctor)"
LMJ Magazine
August 4, 2015
Archived from the original on March 7, 2016
Retrieved August 30, 2017.
"2006 World Music Awards"
Chiff
Archived from the original on February 4, 2008.
Reid, Shaheem (December 30, 2006)
"James Brown Saluted By Michael Jackson at Public Funeral Service"
MTV
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson buys rights to Eminem tunes and more"
Rolling Stone
May 31, 2007.
RedOne (March 23, 2009)
"Interview with RedOne, producer and songwriter for Lady Gaga, Michael Jackson, Akon, Kat DeLuna and Darin" (Interview)
Interviewed by Jan Blumentrath
HitQuarters
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Talmadge, Eric (March 8, 2007)
"Michael Jackson 'wouldn't change' career"
USA Today
Associated Press
Retrieved May 31, 2015
"I've been in the entertainment industry since I was 6 years old, and as Charles Dickens would say, 'It's been the best of times, the worst of times.' But I would not change my career ..
While some have made deliberate attempts to hurt me, I take it in stride because I have a loving family, a strong faith and wonderful friends and fans who have, and continue, to support me."
"Michael Jackson Greets Troops in Japan"
CBS News
March 10, 2007
Retrieved February 25, 2019.
"Michael Jackson wows US troops during lavish Japan stint"
ABC News
March 11, 2007
Retrieved February 25, 2019.
Goodman, Elizabeth (September 24, 2007)
"Will.i.am On Working With Michael Jackson"
Rolling Stone.
Friedman, Roger (May 16, 2008)
"Jacko: Neverland East in Upstate New York"
Fox News Channel
Archived from the original on May 19, 2008
Retrieved May 22, 2008.
"Choose The Tracks On Michael Jackson's 50th Birthday Album!"
Sony BMG
June 20, 2008
Archived from the original on June 28, 2008.
"Neverland Ranch Note Sold to Colony Capital" (Press release)
Business Wire
May 11, 2008
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Neverland escapes foreclosure hook"
CBC.ca
May 12, 2008
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Neverland peters out for pop's Peter Pan"
The Sydney Morning Herald
Press Association
November 13, 2008
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Susan, Susab (April 14, 2009)
"Ten Most Expensive Michael Jackson Collectibles"
Forbes
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Adams, Guy (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson: The final decline of a pop legend"
The Independent
Retrieved April 13, 2019.
Foster, Patrick (March 6, 2009)
"Michael Jackson grand finale curtain-raiser"
The Times
Archived from the original on July 18, 2011.
Kreps, Daniel (March 12, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's "This Is It!" Tour Balloons to 50-Show Run Stretching Into 2010"
Rolling Stone.
"Michael Jackson: The Last Rehearsal"
Life
June 29, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson dead at 50 after cardiac arrest" (Press release)
CNN
June 25, 2009
Retrieved August 31, 2009.
"Los Angeles Fire Department recording of the emergency phone call made from Michael Jackson's home"
June 26, 2009
Retrieved June 27, 2009.
"Partial transcript of Calif
911 call"
Yahoo! News
Associated Press
March 4, 2013.
"Michael Jackson's life cut shockingly short"
Associated Press
June 26, 2009.
Whitcraft, Teri; Pisarcik, Kristin; Brown, Kimberly (June 23, 2010)
"Timeline: Michael Jackson's Final Days"
ABC News
Retrieved March 19, 2017.
Harvey, Michael (June 26, 2009)
"Fans mourn artist for whom it didn't matter if you were black or white"
The Times
Archived from the original on September 20, 2011.
Moore, Matthew (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson, King of Pop, dies of cardiac arrest in Los Angeles"
The Daily Telegraph.
Whitcomb, Dan; Isensee, Laura (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson death still unsolved after autopsy" (Press release)
Reuters
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Doheny, Kathleen (August 24, 2009)
"Propofol Linked to Michael Jackson's Death"
WebMD
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Duke, Alan (February 10, 2010)
"Coroner releases new details about Michael Jackson's death" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved February 23, 2019.
Rawlinson, Linnie; Hunt, Nick (June 26, 2009)
"Jackson dies, almost takes Internet with him" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
Wood, Daniel B
(June 27, 2009)
"Outpouring over Michael Jackson unlike anything since Princess Di"
The Christian Science Monitor
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Shiels, Maggie (June 26, 2009)
"Web slows after Jackson's death"
BBC News Online
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Skok, David (June 26, 2009)
"Internet stretched to limit as fans flock for Michael Jackson news"
The Vancouver Sun
Archived from the original on July 3, 2009.
Krazit, Tom; McCullagh, Declan (June 26, 2009)
"Debate: Can the Internet handle big breaking news?"
CNET
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Dtelter, Brian (June 26, 2009)
"MTV's Jackson Marathon"
The New York Times
ArtsBeat
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jacko news spreads to Eastenders"
Metro
June 26, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"More adds, loose ends, and lament"
The 120 Minutes Archive
July 25, 2009
Retrieved February 15, 2014.
"Over 1.6M apply for Jackson memorial tickets" (Press release)
Associated Press
July 4, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson memorial draws crowds online" (Press release)
CNN
July 8, 2009
Retrieved June 11, 2012.
Scott, Andrew (July 9, 2009)
"Michael Jackson Memorial Earns 31 Million Viewers & More TV News"
AOL TV
Archived from the original on July 23, 2015
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Allen, Nick (July 7, 2009)
"Michael Jackson memorial service: the biggest celebrity send-off of all time"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Potter, Andrew (July 7, 2009)
"There was nothing strange about your daddy"
Maclean's
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
Branigan, Tania (September 8, 2001)
"Jackson spends £20m to be Invincible"
The Guardian.
"Top Moments: Michael Jackson Memorial"
TV Guide
July 7, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Rev Lucious Smith on conducting the memorial service for Michael Jackson"
Radio Live
June 28, 2010
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
Coleman, Mark (September 4, 2009)
"Michael Jackson finally laid to rest in Los Angeles"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Reid, Tim (August 25, 2009)
"LA coroner to treat Michael Jackson's death as a homicide"
The Times.
"Jackson 'had lethal drug levels'"
BBC News Online
August 25, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson's doctor denies manslaughter charge"
BBC News Online
February 9, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Wells, Jason; Rocha, Veroniac (June 25, 2010)
"One year later: Fans gather to pay tribute to Michael Jackson"
Glendale News-Press
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
McCartney, Anthony (June 23, 2010)
"A year after Michael Jackson's death, fan base remains committed to keeping memory alive"
The Gaea Times
Associated Press.
"Conrad Murray guilty of Michael Jackson manslaughter"
BBC News Online
November 8, 2011
Retrieved January 24, 2019.
Leonard, Jack; Blankstein, Andrew; Winton, Richard (November 8, 2011)
"Conrad Murray could face significant prison time"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved January 24, 2019.
Kasindorf, Martin (November 29, 2011)
"Conrad Murray sentenced to four years in Jackson death"
USA Today
Retrieved January 24, 2019.
"Michael Jackson's doctor released from jail"
Entertainment Weekly
The Associated Press
October 28, 2013
Retrieved January 24, 2019.
Cocca, Christina; Lloyd, Jonathan; Tokumatsu, Gordon (October 28, 2013)
"Conrad Murray "Ready to Go On" After Release from Jail"
KNBC
Retrieved January 24, 2019.
Martens, Todd (October 13, 2009)
"Taylor Swift, Michael Jackson dominate American Music Awards nominations [Updated]"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"2009 American Music Awards: Scorecard"
Los Angeles Times
Associated Press
November 22, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Caulfield, Keith (January 6, 2010)
"Taylor Swift Edges Susan Boyle For 2009's Top-Selling Album"
Billboard
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Jackson sells 35 million albums since death"
Today
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Van Buskirk, Eliot (July 1, 2009)
"Michael Jackson First Artist to Sell Over 1 Million Downloads in a Single Week"
Wired
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Smith, Ethan (March 16, 2010)
"Sony Places Big Bet on a Fallen 'King'"
The Wall Street Journal
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson in 'record' $200m music deal"
BBC Online
March 16, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Kreps, Daniel (March 16, 2010)
"Michael Jackson Estate, Sony Strike Massive $250 Million Deal to Release King of Pop's Music"
Rolling Stone.
Christman, Ed (December 14, 2017)
"Michael Jackson Estate, Sony Music Extend Partnership for Recordings"
Billboard
Retrieved February 11, 2019.
Christman, Ed (July 31, 2018)
"Sony Completes Acquisition of Michael Jackson Estate's Share of EMI Music Publishing"
Billboard
Retrieved August 1, 2018.
Trust, Gary (May 21, 2014)
"Michael Jackson, Coldplay Hit Hot 100's Top 10; John Legend Still No
1"
Billboard
Retrieved May 23, 2014.
McIntyre, Hugh (February 16, 2017)
"Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Has Now Been Certified 33-Times Platinum"
Forbes
Retrieved July 9, 2017.
Daly, Rhian (August 20, 2018)
"Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' is no longer the best-selling album of all time in the US"
NME
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Goodman, Dean (October 13, 2009)
"'New' Michael Jackson Single Written In 1983"
Billboard
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Eng, Joyce (August 10, 2009)
"Judge Approves Michael Jackson Film"
TV Guide
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson's This Is It"
Box Office Mojo
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Judge OKs Jackson performance film deal" (Press release)
Associated Press
August 10, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Herrera, Monica (September 23, 2009)
"New Michael Jackson Song, Album Due In October"
Billboard
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Exclusive: Will.i.am Explains His 'Disgust' for New Michael Jackson Album"
Rolling Stone
December 13, 2010
Retrieved March 23, 2019.
"Michael Jackson Fans Will Moonwalk In Motion-Sensing Game"
Billboard
Associated Press
June 15, 2010.
"New Michael Jackson album to be released in May"
BBC News Online
March 31, 2014
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Leight, Elias (September 6, 2017)
"Michael Jackson's Estate Details 'Scream' Compilation"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved September 29, 2017.
"Cirque plans $57M touring Jackson show"
CBC News
November 3, 2010
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Hicks, Tony
"People: Cirque du Soleil mounting Michael Jackson tour"
San Jose Mercury News
Retrieved November 7, 2010.
Jones, Chris (July 13, 2013)
"'Michael Jackson ONE' in Las Vegas: Cirque du Soleil refinds its way"
Chicago Tribune
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (February 2, 2013)
"Michael Jackson's New Vegas Show 'One' Will Double The Fun"
Forbes
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Paulson, Michael (February 14, 2019)
"Michael Jackson Estate Cancels Chicago Musical Run"
The New York Times
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Jevens, Darel (January 23, 2019)
"Michael Jackson musical to premiere in Chicago before Broadway"
Chicago Sun-Times
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Bakare, Lanre (March 7, 2019)
"Michael Jackson estate launches PR blitz as documentary airs in UK"
The Guardian
Retrieved March 8, 2019
"...and does not feature on the playlists of BBC Radio 2."
"Breaking: Michael Jackson Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough Cancels Chicago Premiere, Opens Cold on Broadway Summer 2020"
BroadwayWorld
February 14, 2019
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
"Michael Jackson Fulham FC statue defended by Al Fayed"
BBC News Online
April 3, 2011
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson statue moves to National Football Museum"
BBC News Online
May 6, 2014
Retrieved February 13, 2016.
"Michael Jackson statue: National Football Museum removes artwork"
BBC News Online
March 6, 2019
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
"Jermaine calls for an end to Jackson family feud"
BBC News Online
August 2, 2012
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson nephew made co-guardian of children"
BBC News Online
August 23, 2012
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Galuppo, Mia (November 22, 2019)
"Michael Jackson Biopic in the Works from 'Bohemian Rhapsody' Producer"
Billboard
Retrieved November 25, 2019.
"Choreographer: Michael Jackson 'sexually abused me'"
Today
May 16, 2013
Retrieved October 21, 2017.
Menezes, Alroy (August 6, 2014)
"James Safechuck Alleges Sexual Abuse By Michael Jackson, Sues Singer's Estate"
International Business Times
Retrieved May 30, 2019.
Stone, Ken (July 7, 2017)
"Sex abuse by long-dead Michael Jackson? Judge rejects lawsuit"
MyNewsLA.com
Retrieved March 15, 2019.
Selby, Jenn (August 6, 2014)
"Michael Jackson hit with new child sex abuse claims more than five years after his death"
The Independent
Retrieved March 15, 2019.
Broder, John M
(May 6, 2005)
"2 Witnesses Say They Shared Jackson's Bed and Were Never Molested"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Sperling, Nicole (February 21, 2019)
""Michael Is Everywhere": Two Michael Jackson Accusers Explain Why They're Speaking Out in HBO's Leaving Neverland"
Vanity Fair
Retrieved March 15, 2019.
"Safechuck Ruling Demurrer Dismissal"
Scribd
June 28, 2017
Retrieved May 28, 2019.
Dalton, Andrew (December 20, 2017)
"APNewsBreak: Michael Jackson Sex Abuse Lawsuit Dismissed" (Press release)
Associated Press
Retrieved December 21, 2017.
"Michael Jackson sex abuse lawsuit dismissed"
CBC.ca
December 19, 2017
Retrieved December 21, 2017.
Newman, Jason; Appleford, Steve (March 1, 2019)
"Michael Jackson Accusers: We Did 'Leaving Neverland' Doc to 'Help Other Survivors'"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved July 27, 2019.
White, Peter (March 4, 2019)
"'Leaving Neverland' Goes Global After Kew Media Sells Controversial Michael Jackson Doc Into 130 Territories"
Deadline Hollywood
Retrieved December 8, 2019.
"Michael Jackson 'abused us hundreds of times'"
BBC News Online
February 28, 2019
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Roy, Eleanor Ainge (March 6, 2019)
"Michael Jackson songs pulled from radio stations in New Zealand and Canada"
The Guardian
Retrieved March 8, 2019.
Pieters, Janene (March 6, 2019)
"First Dutch radio station boycotts Michael Jackson music"
NL Times
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Michael Jackson's Family Calls 'Leaving Neverland' Documentary a 'Public Lynching"
Variety
January 28, 2019
Retrieved January 29, 2019.
Kreps, Daniel (January 26, 2019)
"Michael Jackson Estate Slams 'Leaving Neverland': 'Tabloid Character Assassination'"
Rolling Stone
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
"Corey Feldman Guards Michael Jackson After 'Leaving Neverland' Airs"
Vibe
March 4, 2019
Retrieved September 21, 2019.
McDermott, Maeve (May 22, 2019)
"Aaron Carter defends Michael Jackson after saying the star did one 'inappropriate' thing"
USA Today
Retrieved September 21, 2019.
"Leaving Neverland: who is Brett Barnes, Michael Jackson's 'other boy'?"
The Daily Telegraph
March 8, 2019
Retrieved September 21, 2019.
Shepherd, Jack (March 9, 2019)
"Michael Jackson albums climb the charts following Leaving Neverland broadcast"
The Independent
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Jr., Jonathan Landrum (June 24, 2019)
"Michael Jackson's popularity endures, even after new scandal"
The Japan Times
Retrieved July 21, 2019.
Gardner, Eriq (February 21, 2019)
"Michael Jackson Estate Sues HBO Over 'Leaving Neverland' Documentary"
The Hollywood Reporter
Retrieved September 21, 2019.
"MJ Estate v HBO Final Ruling on Arbitration | United States District Court | Government Information"
Scribd
September 20, 2019
Retrieved September 21, 2019.
Ramsey, Teresa (November 14, 2019)
"Michael Jackson songs back on New Zealand radio airwaves"
Stuff.co.nz
Retrieved November 29, 2019.
"Michael Jackson Named Most Successful Entertainer Of All Time"
CityNews
November 15, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Ditzian, Eric (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Groundbreaking Career, By The Numbers"
MTV
Retrieved March 2, 2016.
Dodson, Howard (July 7, 2009)
"Michael Jackson: Icon"
New York Public Library
Retrieved November 26, 2018.
Fernandes, Kasmin (June 25, 2014)
"Why Michael Jackson was a style icon"
The Times of India
Retrieved March 11, 2016.
Lemon, Don (June 23, 2010)
"Michael Jackson's style influence lives on" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved March 11, 2016.
Vena, Jocelyn (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Style Legacy, From Military Jackets To One Glove"
MTV
Retrieved March 11, 2016.
Smith, Danyel (June 26, 2009)
"Commentary: Michael Jackson, the greatest star" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved August 13, 2016.
"Michael Jackson"
Search.bet.com
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Utley, Tom (February 7, 2003)
"Of course Jackson's odd—but his genius is what matters"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Monroe, Bryan (December 2007)
"Michael Jackson in His Own Words"
Ebony.
"Gordy Brings Mourners to Their Feet With Jackson Tribute"
July 7, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Tourtellotte, Bob (July 8, 2009)
"Michael Jackson hailed as greatest entertainer, best dad" (Press release)
Reuters UK
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Rosen, Jill (June 28, 2009)
"7 Ways Michael Jackson Changed The World"
The Baltimore Sun
Retrieved April 24, 2016.
"Sanwi kingdom mourns passing of a prince"
France 24
June 29, 2009
Retrieved November 28, 2019.
Anderson, Kyle (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Video Vanguard Award, In MJ's Top MTV Moments"
MTV
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Leach, Ben (July 9, 2009)
"Moon crater named after Michael Jackson"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved June 26, 2016.
Chivers, Tom (September 28, 2009)
"Google's Doodles: 10 of the best including UFOs and Google"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved June 26, 2016.
Serjeant, Jill (December 29, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's death among 2009's major moments" (Press release)
Reuters
Retrieved November 28, 2019.
Chandler, Cory (May 20, 2010)
"Librarians Prove Michael Jackson Was a Rock Star in Academic Literature"
Texas Tech University
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Hidalgo & Weiner 2010, pp
14–28.
"80 Moments That Shaped the World" (PDF)
British Council
2014
Retrieved November 26, 2017.
Harris, John E
Harris (June 24, 2014)
"Speaking of Vitiligo..." Vitiligo Clinic & Research Center
Retrieved November 24, 2019.
Christgau, Robert (December 2004)
"Michael Jackson: 'The Ultimate Collection'"
Blender
Retrieved March 12, 2019.
Christgau, Robert (January 15, 2002)
"Consumer Guide: Popstakes"
The Village Voice
Retrieved March 12, 2019.
Tucker, Ken (June 5, 1988)
"Summer Reading; Firing Your Father Isn't Easy"
The New York Times
p
751
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"100 Greatest Singers: 65 – David Ruffin"
Rolling Stone
November 27, 2008
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Herron, Martin (June 27, 2009)
"'Michael Jackson saved my life'"
Scarborough Evening News
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Jackson Attends Brown's Public Funeral"
Contactmusic.com
January 2, 2007
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
64.
Simon, Mallory (July 3, 2009)
"Jackson shared bond with 'very dear friend Diana Ross'" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved December 1, 2016.
Taraborrelli 2009, p
60.
Lewis Jones 2005, pp
6, 54.
Winters, David (June 26, 2009)
"David Winters remembers Michael Jackson"
Magick Papers
Archived from the original on July 2, 2015.
Hernandez, Eugene (June 27, 2009)
"Remembering Michael Jackson, On Screen"
IndieWire
Archived from the original on June 27, 2009.
Jones, Lucy (April 2, 2014)
"The Incredible Way Michael Jackson Wrote Music"
NME
Retrieved April 26, 2016.
"Michael Jackson Turns 30!"
Jet
Vol
74 no
35
August 29, 1988
p
58
ISSN 0021-5996.
Heyliger, M
"A State-of-the-Art Pop Album: Thriller by Michael"
Consumerhelpweb.com
Archived from the original on December 4, 2008
"Not many artists could pull off such a variety of styles (funk, post-disco, rock, easy listening, ballads)..."
Erlewine, Stephen Thomas
"Michael Jackson – Off the Wall – Overview"
AllMusic
Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Palmer 1995, p
285.
Erlewine, Stephen Thomas
"Michael Jackson – Thriller – Overview"
AllMusic
All Media Network
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Connelly, Christopher (January 28, 1983)
"Michael Jackson: Thriller"
Rolling Stone.
Henderson, Eric (October 18, 2003)
"Michael Jackson – Thriller"
Slant Magazine
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Christgau 1981, Consumer Guide '70s: J.
George 2004, p
23.
George 2004, p
24.
"Dangerous (Remastered)"
Sony BMG
2001
Archived from the original on December 4, 2005.
Ramage, Bean & Johnson 2001, p
491: "Black or White, described by the record company as 'a rock 'n' roll dance song about racial harmony."
Pareles, Jon (September 3, 1987)
"Critic's Notebook; How Good Is Jackson's 'Bad'?"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Erlewine, Stephen Thomas
"Michael Jackson – Dangerous – Overview"
AllMusic
All Media Network
Retrieved June 15, 2008.
Pareles, Jon (November 24, 1991)
"Recordings View; Michael Jackson in the Electronic Wilderness"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Harrington, Richard (November 24, 1991)
"Jackson's 'Dangerous' Departures; Stylistic Shifts Mar His First Album in 4 Years"
The Washington Post.
Erlewine, Stephen Thomas
"Michael Jackson – HIStory – Overview"
AllMusic
All Media Network
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Hunter, James (August 10, 1995)
"Michael Jackson: HIStory: Past, Present, Future, Book I"
Rolling Stone.
"Thomas W
(Tom) Sneddon Jr"
National Defense Authorization Act
Archived from the original on June 27, 2006
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Erlewine, Stephen Thomas
"Michael Jackson – Invincible – Overview"
AllMusic
All Media Network
Retrieved September 9, 2007.
Beaumont, Mark (November 30, 2001)
"Michael Jackson: Invincible"
NME
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Brackett & Hoard 2004, p
414.
"100 Greatest Singers of All Time"
Rolling Stone
December 3, 2010
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Holden, Stephen (November 1, 1979)
"Michael Jackson: Off The Wall"
Rolling Stone.
Hunter, James (December 6, 2001)
"Michael Jackson: Invincible"
Rolling Stone.
Vogel 2012, p
9.
McCormick, Neil (June 30, 2009)
"Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen & Bono"
The Daily Telegraph
Retrieved February 16, 2016.
Dobuzinskis, Alex (December 30, 2009)
"Jackson "Thriller" film picked for U.S
registry" (Press release)
Reuters
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson, "Billie Jean," directed by Steve Barron, produced by Simon Fields & Paul Flattery"
Blender
October 2005.
Gundersen, Edna (August 25, 2005)
"Music videos changing places"
USA Today
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Robinson, Bryan (February 23, 2005)
"Why Are Michael Jackson's Fans So Devoted?"
ABC News
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Inglis 2006, pp
119, 127: "That Jackson lip-synced 'Billie Jean' is, in itself, not extraordinary, but the fact that it did not change the impact of the performance is extraordinary; whether the performance was live or lip-synced made no difference to the audience."
"Philippine jailhouse rocks to Thriller"
BBC News Online
July 26, 2007
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Taraborrelli 2009, pp
370–373.
Corliss, Richard (September 6, 1993)
"Michael Jackson: Who's Bad?"
Time
Retrieved April 23, 2008.
US Michael J
Jackson, Michael L
Bush, Dennis Tompkins: "Method and means for creating anti-gravity illusion", filed June 29, 1992, issued October 26, 1993 5255452
Campbell 1993, p
273.
Campbell 1993, p
303.
"Michael Jackson Co-Directs Music Film, 'In the Closet'"
Jet
April 27, 1992
p
56.
Campbell 1993, pp
313–314.
Boepple 1995, p
52.
Bark, Ed (June 26, 1995)
"Michael Jackson Interview Raises Questions, Answers"
St
Louis Post-Dispatch
p
06E.
McIntyre, Hugh (August 24, 2014)
"The 5 Most Expensive Music Videos of All Time"
Forbes
Retrieved March 23, 2019.
Gottlieb, Steven (August 28, 2014)
""Scream" Gets Named Most Expensive Video Ever; Director Mark Romanek Disagrees"
VideoStatic
Retrieved March 23, 2019.
Kot, Greg (January 8, 1997)
"Pumpkins a Smash Hit with 7 Grammy Nominations"
Chicago Tribune
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
"Longest music video"
Guinness World Records
November 21, 2013
Retrieved March 23, 2019.
Montgomery, James (June 26, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Video Co-Stars: From Eddie Murphy to Marlon Brando"
MTV
Retrieved March 22, 2010.
"NAACP Image Award Spotlight Black' Achievements"
Jet
Vol
101 no
13
March 18, 2002
p
36
ISSN 0021-5996.
"Zorro, Nemo, Muppets & More: Wide Variety Tapped for 2009 Film Registry"
Library of Congress
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Itzkoff, Dave (December 30, 2009)
"'Thriller' Video Added to U.S
Film Registry"
The New York Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Michael Jackson and Halle Berry Pick Up Bambi Awards in Berlin"
Hello!
November 22, 2002
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Masley, Ed (March 28, 2019)
"Stevie Nicks is about to join these 22 men as a two-time Rock and Rock Hall of Fame inductee"
The Arizona Republic
Retrieved April 7, 2019.
Sanneh, Kelefa (June 15, 2002)
"Hall of Fame Inducts Songwriters"
The New York Times
Retrieved April 11, 2019.
Keiser, Tom (August 15, 2010)
"Photos: Michael Jackson induction ceremony"
The News-Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Yarborough, Chuck (August 19, 2014)
"R&B Music Hall of Fame sets big weekend to induct sophomore class featuring Michael Jackson, Whitney Houston, Marvin Gaye, Norm N
Nite and more"
The Plain Dealer
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Lewis, Monica (June 14, 2007)
"20 People Who Changed Black Music: Michael Jackson, the Child Star-Turned-Adult Enigma"
The Miami Herald
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
Collett-White, Mike (March 11, 2009)
"Michael Jackson to add concerts after sellout" (Press release)
Reuters
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Grammy Legend Award"
Grammy.org
National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences
Archived from the original on January 22, 2011
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Lifetime Achievement Award"
National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"Hot 100 Anniversary: Most No
1s By Artist"
Billboard
August 6, 2008
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Wilkinson, Peter (June 26, 2009)
"Jackson was star the world could not ignore" (Press release)
CNN
Retrieved August 15, 2016.
Hinckley, David (June 25, 2014)
"Michael Jackson remembered 5 years later: How the Daily News covered the tragic story of icon's death"
New York Daily News
Retrieved September 9, 2015.
"Doctorates of Rock"
Rolling Stone
July 19, 2011
Retrieved April 12, 2019.
Serjeant, Jill (December 29, 2009)
"Michael Jackson's Death Among 2009's Major Moments" (Press release)
Reuters
Retrieved April 14, 2019.
Gundersen, Edna (November 24, 2003)
"For Jackson, scandal could spell financial ruin"
USA Today
Retrieved March 14, 2010.
Deutsch, Linda (May 4, 2005)
"Forensic accountant tells court Jackson is in financial straits"
San Diego Union-Tribune
Archived from the original on March 26, 2017
Retrieved March 25, 2017.
Pulley, Brett (November 21, 2003)
"Michael Jackson's Ups And Downs"
Forbes
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (August 29, 2018)
"Michael Jackson at 60: The King of Pop by the Numbers"
Forbes
Retrieved November 14, 2018.
"Stress killed MJ, says ex-publicist"
The Times of India
June 27, 2009
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
O'Brien, Timothy L (May 14, 2006)
"What Happened to the Fortune Michael Jackson Made?"
The New York Times
p
1
Retrieved March 16, 2013.
"Estate of Michael J
Jackson, Deceased, John G
Branca, Co-Executor and John McClain, Co-Executor"
August 19, 2016.
Gottlieb, Jeff (February 7, 2014)
"Michael Jackson estate embroiled in tax fight with IRS"
Los Angeles Times
Retrieved May 31, 2015.
"United States Tax Court: Washington, DC 20217"
February 2, 2016.
Reilly, Peter J
(July 27, 2018)
"We May Have to Wait a Year for Decision in Michael Jackson Estate Tax Case"
Forbes
Retrieved February 28, 2019.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (October 14, 2016)
"Michael Jackson's Earnings: $825 Million In 2016"
Forbes
Retrieved December 11, 2016.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley; Robehmed, Natalie (October 31, 2017)
"The Highest-Paid Dead Celebrities of 2018"
Forbes
Retrieved October 31, 2018.
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (October 30, 2019)
"The Real Reason Behind Michael Jackson's Earnings Drop"
Forbes
Retrieved November 28, 2019.

    "Michael Jackson tops list of top-earning dead celebs at $60 mn, Elvis Presley retains 2nd spot"
The Economic Times
November 1, 2019
Retrieved November 28, 2019.

Print sources

    Boepple, Leanne (1995)
"Scream: Space Odyssey, Jackson-Style
(video production; Michael and Janet Jackson video)"
TCI: Theatre Crafts International
Theatre Crafts International
29
ISSN 1063-9497.
    Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian (2004)
The Rolling Stone Album Guide
Fireside
ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8.
    Bronson, Fred (2003)
Billboard's Hottest Hot 100 Hits (3rd ed.)
Billboard Books
ISBN 978-0-8230-7738-0.
    Campbell, Lisa D (1993)
Michael Jackson: The King of Pop
Branden
ISBN 978-0-8283-1957-7.
    Campbell, Lisa D (1995)
Michael Jackson: The King of Pop's Darkest Hour



#@#@#Federer#@#@#
Federer was born in Basel, Switzerland. 
His father, Robert Federer, is a Swiss-German from Berneck in the Canton of St. Gallen, and his mother, Lynette Federer (née Durand), is an Afrikaner from Kempton Park, Gauteng, in South Africa. 
Federer has one sibling, his older sister, Diana, who is the mother of a set of twins. 
Since Federer’s mother is South African, he holds both Swiss and South African citizenship. Federer grew up in nearby Birsfelden, Riehen, and then Münchenstein, close to the French and German borders, and he speaks Swiss German, Standard German, English, and French fluently, as well as functional Italian and Swedish; Swiss German is his native language.
Federer served as a ball boy at his hometown Basel tournament, the Swiss Indoors, in 1992 and 1993.
Federer is married to former Women's Tennis Association player Miroslava Federer (née Vavrinec), whom he met while they were both competing for Switzerland at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. 
Usually called Mirka, Federer’s wife retired from the tour in 2002 because of a foot injury. 
They were married at Wenkenhof Villa in Riehen near Basel on 11 April 2009, surrounded by a small group of close friends and family. 
In 2009, Mirka, Federer’s wife gave birth to identical twin girls. 
The Federers had another pair of identical twins in 2014, this time boys.[
In 2003, Federer established the Roger Federer Foundation to help disadvantaged children and to promote their access to education and sport.
Since May 2004, citing his close ties with South Africa (his mother is South African) Federer has been supporting the South Africa-Swiss charity IMBEWU, which helps children better connect to sports as well as social and health awareness. 
In 2005, Federer visited South Africa to meet the children that had benefited from his support.
Also in 2005, Federer auctioned his racquet from his US Open championship to aid victims of Hurricane Katrina.
At the 2005 Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, Federer arranged an exhibition involving several top players from the ATP and WTA tour called Rally for Relief. 
The proceeds went to the victims of the tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In December 2006, Federer visited Tamil Nadu, one of the areas in India most affected by the tsunami. 
Federer was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador by UNICEF in April 2006 and has appeared in UNICEF public messages to raise public awareness of AIDS.
In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Federer arranged a collaboration with fellow top tennis players for a special charity event during the 2010 Australian Open called 'Hit for Haiti', in which proceeds went to Haiti earthquake victims. 
Federer participated in a follow-up charity exhibition during the 2010 Indian Wells Masters, which raised $1 million.
The Nadal vs. Federer "Match for Africa" in 2010 in Zurich and Madrid raised more than $4 million for the Roger Federer Foundation and Fundación Rafa Nadal. 
In January 2011, Federer took part in an exhibition, Rally for Relief, to raise money for the victims of the Queensland floods. 
In 2014, the "Match for Africa 2" between Federer and Stan Wawrinka, again in Zurich, raised £850,000 for education projects in Southern Africa.
On 24 November 2017, Federer received an honorary doctorate awarded to him by his home university, the University of Basel. 
Federer received the title in recognition for his role in increasing the international reputation of Basel and Switzerland, and also his engagement for children in Africa through his charitable foundation.
Roger Federer ( born 8 August 1981) is a Swiss professional tennis player who is ranked world No. 3 in men's singles tennis by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP). 
Federer has won 20 Grand Slam singles titles—the most in history by a male player—and has held the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings for a record total of 310 weeks (including a record 237 consecutive weeks) and was the year-end No. 1 five times, including four consecutive.
Federer, who turned professional in 1998, was continuously ranked in the top ten from October 2002 to November 2016.
Federer has won a record eight Wimbledon titles, six Australian Open titles, five US Open titles (all consecutive, a record), and one French Open title. 
Federer is one of eight men to have achieved a Career Grand Slam. 
Federer has reached a record 31 men's singles Grand Slam finals, including 10 consecutively from the 2005 Wimbledon Championships to the 2007 US Open. 
Federer has also won a record six ATP Finals titles, 28 ATP Tour Masters 1000 titles, and a record 24 ATP Tour 500 titles. 
Federer is also the only player after Jimmy Connors to have won 100 or more career singles titles, as well as to amass 1,200 wins in the Open Era. 
In addition, Federer has won one Davis Cup title with the Swiss Davis Cup team.
Federer's all-court game and versatile style of play involve exceptional footwork and shot-making. 
Effective both as a baseliner and a volleyer, his apparent effortlessness and efficient movement on the court have made Federer highly popular among tennis fans. 
Federer has received the tour Sportsmanship Award 13 times and been named the ATP Player of the Year and ITF World Champion five times. Federer has won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award a record five times, including four consecutive awards from 2005 to 2008.
Federer is also the only person to have won the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year award four times.
Tennis legend Roger Federer is used to partnering with some of the biggest brands in sports.
This year, Federer ranked highest among fellow athletes in endorsement revenue, according to Forbes, earning a total of $86 million from companies like Credit Suisse, Mercedes-Benz, Rolex and Japanese apparel brand Uniqlo.
But a recent deal the 20-time Grand Slam tennis champ, Federer made speaks to an off-the-court passion: sneakers. 
Federer owns over 250 pairs.
During an event for his new deal with Swiss shoemaker On, Federer talked about how important it is for young people to have an obsession.
“You don’t have to have 250 pairs of sneakers,” Federer tells CNBC Make It. 
“I can tell you that.”
“But I think obsession can definitely lead to some good things sometimes because you really follow something that you’re really passionate about,” Federer says. 
“And when you do that, passion doesn’t feel like work.”
Federer’s first passion may have been tennis, but his initial Nike deal as a teenager sparked his interest in sneaker culture, including both tennis shoes and basketball shoes, he told Complex Networks in a 2014 interview.
Today, that obsession has parlayed into his new business venture as an investor, advisor and product designer for On. 
“I don’t think working on On has felt like work or like a business,” Federer says. 
“It’s been more [of a] fun process.”
Though Federer is quick to tout the passion that comes from having an obsession, he also hints at its downside. 
“Of course, it can become excessive and then it becomes dangerous,” Federer says. 
“Then you need to take a break. 
You need to take a step back with everything you do, because if you do it too much you sometimes lose the fire.”
At 37 years of age, Roger Federer is still playing some of the best tennis of his career, and turning it into tournament trophies.
The former world number one is one of the most successful players of all time. 
Federer has won the men's singles tournament at Wimbledon alone eight times since 2003, as well as 20 Grand Slam singles titles all over the world.
Federer is not only one of the most talented athletes on the planet, but also the most profitable.
Forbes named him the world's highest-paid tennis player in 2018, earning $77.2 million (£58.3 million) from professional wins and sponsorship deals with companies from Rolex to Credit Suisse.
Roger Federer is one of the greatest tennis players of all time, holding 20 Grand Slam® titles and the record for most titles at Wimbledon. 
But for the Swiss born Federer, tennis wasn’t always about breaking records. 
It wasn’t until 2009 — the summer that coincided with the birth of his first set of twins — when Roger broke Pete Sampras’ all-time Grand Slam® record at Wimbledon, that he achieved his own personal definition of greatness. 
The Rolex Federer was wearing that day brings back fond memories of a decisive summer.
“I believe in the power of people. 
They might only need some initial empowerment. 
We know that a good education empowers children by allowing them to take their future into their own hands and play an active part in shaping it. 
And we trust in the best will of parents that they want to ensure the best possible opportunities for their children. 
For 15 years my Foundation has therefore been committed to enable parents and local communities in providing these children with the opportunity for a good education. 
We have reached one million children by today.”
Indeed, Federer, who grew up in Basel, near the border with Germany and France, is also a globally minded individual. 
This is especially true as his mother, Lynette, comes from South Africa, and Federer therefore grew up in different cultural and linguistic worlds. 
Roger Federer is also an ideal global ambassador from Credit Suisse's perspective. 
Shared values such as the pursuit of excellence and strength of purpose make Federer a sought-​after partner for the long term. 
It is therefore intended that Federer’s partnership with Credit Suisse will extend beyond the end of his sporting career.

This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Roger Federer
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
"Federer" redirects here. For other uses, see Federer (disambiguation).
Roger FedererRoger Federer (26 June 2009, Wimbledon) 2 new.jpg
Roger Federer serving in the 2009 Wimbledon final
Country (sports)	  Switzerland
Residence	Bottmingen, Switzerland
Born	8 August 1981 (age 38)
Basel, Switzerland
Height	1.85 m (6 ft 1 in)

Turned pro	1998
Plays	Right-handed (one-handed backhand)
Prize money	$ 129,231,891

     2nd all-time leader in earnings

Official website	rogerfederer.com
Singles
Career record	1237–270 (82.1% in ATP Tour events)
Career titles	103 (2nd in the Open Era)
Highest ranking	No. 1 (2 February 2004)
Current ranking	No. 3 (6 May 2019)

Grand Slam Singles results
Australian Open	W (2004, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2017, 2018)
French Open	W (2009)
Wimbledon	W (2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012, 2017)
US Open	W (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008)
Other tournaments
Tour Finals	W (2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2011)
Olympic Games	F (2012)
Doubles
Career record	131–92 (58.7% in Grand Slam & ATP Tour main draw matches, in Olympics, Davis Cup & Laver Cup)
Career titles	8
Highest ranking	No. 24 (9 June 2003)
Grand Slam Doubles results
Australian Open	3R (2003)
French Open	1R (2000)
Wimbledon	QF (2000)
US Open	3R (2002)
Other doubles tournaments
Olympic Games	W (2008)
Team competitions
Davis Cup	W (2014)
Hopman Cup	W (2001, 2018, 2019)
Olympic medal record
[hide]
Gold medal – first place 	2008 Beijing 	Doubles
Silver medal – second place 	2012 London 	Singles
Last updated on: 25 November 2019.

Roger Federer (German pronunciation: [ˈrɔdʒər ˈfeːdərər]; born 8 August 1981) is a Swiss professional tennis player who is ranked world No. 3 in men's singles tennis by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP).
 Federer has won 20 Grand Slam singles titles—the most in history by a male player—and has held the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings for a record total of 310 weeks (including a record 237 consecutive weeks) and was the year-end No. 1 five times, including four consecutive. Federer, who turned professional in 1998, was continuously ranked in the top ten from October 2002 to November 2016.

Federer has won a record eight Wimbledon titles, six Australian Open titles, five US Open titles (all consecutive, a record), and one French Open title. Federer is one of eight men to have achieved a Career Grand Slam. Federer has reached a record 31 men's singles Grand Slam finals, including 10 consecutively from the 2005 Wimbledon Championships to the 2007 US Open. Federer has also won a record six ATP Finals titles, 28 ATP Tour Masters 1000 titles, and a record 24 ATP Tour 500 titles. Federer was a member of Switzerland's winning Davis Cup team in 2014. Federer is also the only player after Jimmy Connors to have won 100 or more career singles titles, as well as to amass 1,200 wins in the Open Era.

Federer's all-court game and versatile style of play involve exceptional footwork and shot-making.
 Effective both as a baseliner and a volleyer, his apparent effortlessness and efficient movement on the court have made Federer highly popular among tennis fans. Federer has received the tour Sportsmanship Award 13 times and been named the ATP Player of the Year and ITF World Champion five times. Federer has won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award a record five times, including four consecutive awards from 2005 to 2008. Federer is also the only person to have won the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year award four times.
Contents

    1 Personal life
    2 Tennis career
    3 National representation
    4 International representation
    5 Rivalries
    6 Achievements
    7 Legacy and cultural impact
    8 Playing style
    9 Equipment and apparel
    10 Endorsements
    11 Career statistics
    12 See also
    13 Notes
    14 References
    15 Further reading
    16 External links

Personal life
Childhood and early life

Federer was born in Basel, Switzerland.
 His father, Robert Federer, is a Swiss-German from Berneck in the Canton of St. Gallen, and his mother, Lynette Federer (née Durand), is an Afrikaner from Kempton Park, Gauteng, in South Africa. Federer has one sibling, his older sister, Diana,
 who is the mother of a set of twins.
 Since his mother is South African, Federer holds both Swiss and South African citizenship.
 Federer grew up in nearby Birsfelden, Riehen, and then Münchenstein, close to the French and German borders, and Federer speaks Swiss German, Standard German, English, and French fluently, as well as functional Italian and Swedish; Swiss German is his native language.



 Federer served as a ball boy at his hometown Basel tournament, the Swiss Indoors, in 1992 and 1993.


Federer's signature

Like all male Swiss citizens, Federer was subject to compulsory military service in the Swiss Armed Forces. However, in 2003 Federer was ruled "unsuitable" and was subsequently not required to fulfill his military obligation.
 Instead, Federer served in the civil protection force and was required to pay 3% of his taxable income as an alternative.
 Federer grew up supporting FC Basel and the Swiss national football team.
 Federer also credits his hand-eye coordination to the wide range of sports Federer played as a child, including badminton and basketball.

Family

Federer is married to former Women's Tennis Association player Miroslava Federer (née Vavrinec), whom Federer met while they were both competing for Switzerland at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Usually called Mirka, she retired from the tour in 2002 because of a foot injury.
 They were married at Wenkenhof Villa in Riehen near Basel on 11 April 2009, surrounded by a small group of close friends and family.
 In 2009, Mirka gave birth to identical twin girls.
 The Federers had another pair of identical twins in 2014, this time boys.


Tennis career
1993–1998: Junior years
Main article: Roger Federer junior years

Federer's main accomplishments as a junior player came at Wimbledon in 1998, where Federer won both the boys' singles final over Irakli Labadze,
 and in doubles teamed with Olivier Rochus, defeating the team of Michaël Llodra and Andy Ram.
 In addition, Federer reached the US Open Junior final in 1998, losing to David Nalbandian. Federer won four ITF junior singles tournaments in his career, including the prestigious Orange Bowl, where Federer defeated Guillermo Coria in the final.
 Federer ended 1998 with the No. 1 junior world ranking, was awarded ITF junior World Champion, and entered his first tournament as a professional during 1998 in Gstaad, where Federer lost to Lucas Arnold Ker in the first round.[citation needed]
1998–2002: Early professional career
Main article: Roger Federer's early career

Federer entered the top 100 ranking for the first time on 20 September 1999 and started at the 1999 Marseille Open defeating the reigning champion of the 1998 French Open, Spaniard Carlos Moyá. His first final came at the Marseille Open in 2000, where Federer lost to fellow Swiss Marc Rosset.
 Federer won the 2001 Hopman Cup representing Switzerland, along with world No. 1 Martina Hingis.


 The duo defeated the American pair of Monica Seles and Jan-Michael Gambill in the finals. Federer later said that his experience with Hingis "definitely helped me to become the player I am today."


Federer's first singles win was at the 2001 Milan Indoor tournament, where Federer defeated Julien Boutter in the final.
 Although Federer won his first title already in 1999 on the Challenger tour, winning the doubles event in Segovia, Spain with Dutchman Sander Groen, the final was played on Federer's 18th birthday. In 2001, Federer made his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at the French Open, losing to former world No. 2 and eventual finalist Alex Corretja. His run to the French quarterfinals launched him into the top 15 for the first time in his career.


His international breakthrough came at the 2001 Wimbledon Championships, where the 19-year-old Federer faced the four-time defending champion and all-time Grand Slam leader Pete Sampras. Federer beat the No. 1 seed in a five-set match to reach the quarterfinals.
 In the quarters Federer faced Englishman Tim Henman, eventually losing in a fourth-set tiebreaker.[citation needed]

The first final Federer reached at the Masters level came at the 2002 Miami Masters event, where Federer lost to former and future No. 1 Andre Agassi on hard court.
 Federer won his first Master Series event at the 2002 Hamburg Masters on clay, over Marat Safin; the victory put him in top 10 for the first time.
 Federer made 10 singles finals between 1998 and 2002, of which Federer won four and lost six.




 Federer also made six finals in doubles. Federer finished 2001 with an ATP ranking of No. 13, and 2002 was the first year Federer was ranked within the top 10, finishing at No. 6.[citation needed]
2003: Grand Slam breakthrough at Wimbledon
Main article: 2003 Roger Federer tennis season

In 2003, Federer won his first Grand Slam singles title at Wimbledon, beating Andy Roddick in the semifinals and Mark Philippoussis in the final.
 In August Federer had a chance to take over the No. 1 ranking for the first time from Andre Agassi if Federer made it to the Montreal final. However, Federer fell in the semifinals to Roddick, in a final-set tiebreaker, leaving him 120 points behind Agassi.
 This, coupled with early losses to David Nalbandian at Cincinnati and the US Open, denied Federer the chance to become No. 1 for the duration of the season.[citation needed]

Federer won his first and to date only doubles Masters Series 1000 event in Miami with Max Mirnyi
 and made it to one singles Masters Series 1000 event in Rome on clay, which Federer lost.
 Federer made it to nine finals on the ATP Tour and won seven of them, including the 500 series events at Dubai and Vienna.
 Lastly, Federer won the year-end championships over Andre Agassi, finishing the year as world No. 2, narrowly behind Andy Roddick by only 160 points.

2004: Imposing dominance
Federer at the 2004 US Open, where Federer became the first man since 1988 to win three majors in a season
Main article: 2004 Roger Federer tennis season

During 2004, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles for the first time in his career and became the first person to do so since Mats Wilander in 1988. His first major hard-court title came at the Australian Open over Marat Safin, thereby becoming the world No. 1 for the first time. Federer then won his second Wimbledon crown over Andy Roddick.
 Federer defeated the 2001 US Open champion, Lleyton Hewitt, at the US Open for his first title there.


Federer won three ATP Masters Series 1000 events, one was on clay in Hamburg, and the other two were on hard surfaces at Indian Wells and in Canada.
 Federer took the ATP 500 series event at Dubai and wrapped up the year by winning the year-end championships for the second time.
 Federer also won his first tournament on home soil by capturing the Swiss Open in Gstaad. His 11 singles titles were the most of any player in two decades, and his record of 74–6 was the best since Ivan Lendl in 1986. Federer reached the year-end No. 1 ranking for the first time.[citation needed]
2005: Consolidating dominance
Main article: 2005 Roger Federer tennis season

In 2005, Federer failed to reach the finals of the first two Grand Slam tournaments, losing the Australian Open semifinal to eventual champion Safin after holding match points, and the French Open semifinal to eventual champion Rafael Nadal.
 However, Federer quickly reestablished his dominance on grass, winning the Wimbledon Championships over Andy Roddick. At the US Open, Federer defeated Andre Agassi in the latter's last major final.


Federer also took four ATP Masters Series 1000 wins: Indian Wells, Miami and Cincinnati on hard court, and Hamburg on clay.
 The win in Miami was particularly noteworthy as it was the first final contested between Federer and Nadal. Federer recovered from two sets and a break down to take the final in five sets. Furthermore, Federer won two ATP 500 series events at Rotterdam and Dubai.
 Federer lost the year-end championships to David Nalbandian in five sets while playing through a foot injury that sidelined him for almost the rest of the season after September.
 Federer maintained his position as No. 1 for the entire season.


Federer won 11 singles titles, which ties his 2004 season. Federer's 81 match victories were the most since Pete Sampras in 1993, and his record of 81–4 (95.2%) remains the third-best winning percentage in the Open Era behind John McEnroe's 1984 and Jimmy Connors's 1974.[citation needed]
2006: Career-best season
Main article: 2006 Roger Federer tennis season

The 2006 season was statistically the best season of Federer's career. In November 2011, Stephen Tignor, chief editorial writer for Tennis.com, ranked Federer's 2006 season as statistically the second-best season of all time during the Open Era, behind Rod Laver's Grand Slam year of 1969.

Federer hits a forehand at the 2006 US Open, where Federer became the first man in history to achieve the Wimbledon-US Open double for three consecutive seasons

Federer won 12 singles titles (the most of any player since Thomas Muster in 1995 and John McEnroe in 1984) and had a match record of 92–5 (the most wins since Ivan Lendl in 1982). Federer reached the finals in an astounding 16 of the 17 tournaments Federer entered during the season.[citation needed]

In 2006, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles and reached the final of the other, with the only loss coming against Nadal in the French Open. This was Federer and Nadal's first meeting in a Grand Slam final.
 Federer was the first man to reach all four finals in a calendar year since Rod Laver in 1969. Federer defeated Nadal in the Wimbledon Championships final. In the Australian Open, Federer defeated Marcos Baghdatis,
 and at the US Open, Federer defeated Roddick (2003 champion).
 In addition, Federer made it to six ATP Masters Series 1000 finals, winning four on hard surfaces and losing two on clay to Nadal. Federer, however, consistently pushed Nadal to the limit on clay throughout the season taking him to fourth-set tiebreakers in Monte-Carlo and Paris, and a thrilling match in Rome that went to a deciding fifth-set tiebreaker.[citation needed]

Federer won one ATP 500 series event in Tokyo and captured the year-end championships for the third time in his career, again finishing the year as world No. 1.
 Federer only lost to two players during 2006, to Nadal four times in finals, and to 19-year-old Andy Murray in the second round of the 2006 Cincinnati Masters, in what was Federer's only defeat before reaching the final of a tournament that year. Federer finished the season on a 29-match winning streak, as well as winning 48 of his last 49 matches after the French Open.[citation needed]

Near the end of the season Federer won his hometown tournament, the Swiss Indoors in Basel, Switzerland for the first time, having finished runner up in 2000 and 2001, and missing the tournament in 2004 and 2005 due to injuries.[citation needed]
2007: Holding off young rivals
Main article: 2007 Roger Federer tennis season

In 2007, Federer reached all four Grand Slam singles finals, winning three of them again. Federer won the Australian Open without dropping a set, beating Fernando González in the final. This made him the first man in the 21st century to accomplish the feat, as Björn Borg at the 1980 French Open was the last to win a Grand Slam tournament without the loss of a set.
 Federer had entered the year on a huge winning streak and after capturing his fourth Dubai crown Federer's winning streak stood at 41 matches, the longest of his career and only five shy of the record. Federer entered Indian Wells as the three-time defending champion, but his streak ended in controversy. Federer was defeated by an Argentine, Guillermo Cañas, who had failed a drug test for illegal doping.

Federer was coined "Darth Federer" by fans and commentators at the 2007 US Open

This surprising first-round defeat marked the first time since August 2006 Federer suffered defeat, a period spanning over seven months.[citation needed]

During the clay season, Federer's victory in the Hamburg Masters final was particularly impressive, as it snapped Nadal's 81-match winning streak on clay, an Open-era record. Federer turned the match around from a set down to sweep 12 of the final 14 games, including a final set bagel. At the French Open, some anticipated that Federer could become the first man in almost 40 years to hold all four majors simultaneously, having just resoundingly defeated young rival Nadal on clay entering the tournament. However, in a repeat of the previous year Federer played a tough four-set final against Nadal, but was undone by going 1/17 on break-point chances.


At Wimbledon, Federer entered the tournament not only as the four-time defending champion, but also riding a 48-match winning streak on grass. Once again, Federer defeated Rafael Nadal for a second consecutive year in the final, this time in a thrilling five-set encounter that many analysts hailed as the greatest Wimbledon final since 1980. Victory at Wimbledon equaled him with Björn Borg for the record of five consecutive championships at the All England Club.[citation needed]

Federer reached the final in Montreal before playing a young and relatively unknown Serbian named Novak Djokovic. Djokovic proved his potential by beating the world No. 1 in a final-set tiebreaker upset. Federer rebounded in Cincinnati to capture his fifth title of the year. Federer entered the US Open as the three-time defending champion and faced Djokovic in the final. This time, Federer prevailed in a close straight-set match. Victory in New York moved him ahead of Laver and Borg for third on the all-time list of major championship victories. Throughout the tournament, the American press labelled him Darth Federer for his all-black attire (which included tuxedo-striped shorts) and the tournament played The Imperial March from Star Wars when Federer was announced onto the court for each of his matches.
 Federer closed out the year with victories in Basel and the Year End Championships in Shanghai.[citation needed]

He finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fourth year in a row, demonstrating his dominance, and during these four years Federer won 11 Grand Slam singles titles. After his phenomenal triple Grand Slam season yet again, Federer became the only player in history to win three Majors in a year for three years (2004, 2006, 2007).



 It was the third consecutive season that Federer held the No. 1 ranking for all 52 weeks of the year.[citation needed]
2008: Illness, Olympic Gold and fifth US Open
Main article: 2008 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer's success in 2008 was severely hampered by a lingering bout of mononucleosis, which Federer suffered from during the first half of the year.
 At the end of the year Federer suffered a back injury.[citation needed]

In 2008, Federer captured one Grand Slam, a singles title at the US Open over Andy Murray.
 Federer was defeated by Nadal in two Grand Slam finals, the French Open and Wimbledon, which was regarded as the best match of tennis history by many, when Federer was going for six straight wins to break Björn Borg's record.
 At the Australian Open, Federer lost in the semifinals to eventual winner Djokovic, which ended his record of 10 consecutive finals.
 Federer lost twice in Masters Series 1000 finals on clay to Nadal, at Monte Carlo and Hamburg.
 Federer captured three titles in 250-level events at Estoril, Halle, and Basel.[citation needed]

At the Olympic Games, Federer and Stan Wawrinka won the gold medal in doubles, after beating the Bryan brothers American team in the semifinals and the Swedish duo of Simon Aspelin and Thomas Johansson in the final.
 However, Federer could only reach the quarterfinals in the singles draw, bowing out to then No. 8 James Blake, succumbing his No. 1 ranking to Nadal after being at the top for a record 237 consecutive weeks.
 Federer ended the year ranked No. 2.[citation needed]
2009: Career Grand Slam and Major title record
Main article: 2009 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer entered the 2009 season with 13 Grand Slams, only one behind Pete Sampras' all-time record. The season began with a loss to Nadal in the final of the Australian Open in a hotly contested five-set match.
 Federer struggled following the defeat in Melbourne and entered the clay season without a title.[citation needed]
Federer winning the French Open, and completing the career Grand Slam.

Federer's season turned around in the final masters event of the clay season when Federer defeated Nadal on clay for only the second time to capture the Madrid Masters.
 Federer entered the French Open with few predicting him to win the elusive Parisian title having lost to Nadal in the final weekend for the past four seasons. After Nadal's unexpected defeat to Robin Söderling, Federer became the overwhelming favorite. In his next match, Federer came from two sets and break point down in the third set to defeat Tommy Haas in five sets.
 Federer also fought back from a two-sets-to-one deficit against a young Juan Martín del Potro to win a five setter in the semifinals.
 In the final, Federer faced Söderling, and with straight sets victory, Federer finally captured the Coupe des Mousquetaires and career Grand Slam.
 This victory also tied him with Pete Sampras for the most Grand Slam singles titles.[citation needed]

Federer turned his sights to the grass courts of Wimbledon, where Federer breezed his way up to the final.[citation needed] In the championship match Federer faced long-time rival Andy Roddick in what was their eighth and final meeting at a Grand Slam.[citation needed] Roddick pushed Federer into a record-setting fifth set,[citation needed] which Federer claimed 16–14 to win his 15th Grand Slam singles title,[citation needed] breaking the all-time record of Pete Sampras.[citation needed]

Federer continued his summer run by winning his third title on the lightning-fast courts of the Cincinnati Masters, defeating Novak Djokovic in the final.
 At the US Open Federer defeated Söderling in the quarters and Djokovic, for the third consecutive year, in the semifinals. On the penultimate point of the Djokovic match Federer hit what many consider to be the greatest shot of his career, a tweener winner, to set up match points.
 Federer played del Potro in the final and led two sets to one before ultimately losing a fourth-set tiebreaker and subsequently the match.


The 2009 season was perhaps the most historically relevant of Federer's career as Federer completed a career Grand Slam by winning his first French Open title and won a men's record fifteenth Grand Slam singles title at Wimbledon, surpassing Pete Sampras's mark of fourteen.
 The Wimbledon final was also historic for being the longest Grand Slam final in terms of games played with Federer prevailing 16–14 in the fifth set.[citation needed]

Federer finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fifth time in his career.[citation needed]
2010: Fourth Australian Open
Main article: 2010 Roger Federer tennis season
Federer won a record 16th Major at the 2010 Australian Open

Federer started the year with a win at the Australian Open,
 where Federer defeated Andy Murray in the final, extending the Grand Slam singles record to sixteen titles and matching Andre Agassi's record of four Australian Open titles.
 Since Wimbledon 2005 Federer had made 18 out of 19 finals in Grand Slam tournaments, a period of sustained excellence unparalleled in the Open Era. This tournament, however, marked the end of his dominance at the majors.[citation needed]

At the French Open, Federer won his 700th tour match and 150th tour match on clay.

 However, Federer failed to reach a Grand Slam semifinal for the first time since the 2004 French Open, losing to Söderling in the last 8 and relinquishing his No. 1 ranking,
 having been just one week away from equalling Pete Sampras's record of 286 weeks as world No. 1. In a huge upset at Wimbledon, Federer lost in the last 8 again to Tomáš Berdych and fell to No. 3 in the rankings for the first time in 6 years and 8 months.




Towards the middle of July, Federer hired Pete Sampras' old coach Paul Annacone on a trial basis to put his tennis game and career back on track.
 At the 2010 US Open, Federer reached the semifinals, where Federer lost a five-set match to Novak Djokovic after holding two match points.
 Federer made it to four Masters 1000 finals, prevailing at the Cincinnati Masters against Mardy Fish.


Federer finished the year in strong form, winning indoor titles at the Stockholm Open, Swiss Indoors, and the ATP World Tour Finals in London, which brought his tally to 66 career titles. Federer won the year-end championships in London by beating rival Rafael Nadal for his fifth title at the event. Federer beat all contenders except Nadal in straight sets. It remains the only tournament in his career where Federer defeated all fellow members of the Big Four. Since Wimbledon 2010, Federer had a win-loss record of 34–4. Federer finished in the top two for the eighth consecutive season.[citation needed]
2011: Tour Finals title record
Main article: 2011 Roger Federer tennis season

The year 2011 was a lean year for Federer, although great by most player's standards. Federer was defeated in straight sets in the semifinals of the 2011 Australian Open by eventual champion Novak Djokovic,
 marking the first time since July 2003 that Federer did not hold any of the four major titles. In the French Open semifinals, Federer ended Djokovic's undefeated streak of 43 consecutive wins with a four-set victory. Federer then lost in the final to Rafael Nadal. At Wimbledon, Federer advanced to his 29th consecutive Grand Slam quarterfinal, losing to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. It marked the first time in his career that Federer had lost a Grand Slam tournament match after winning the first two sets.[citation needed]

At the US Open, Federer lost in the semifinals to Novak Djokovic in five sets. In a repeat of previous year's semifinal event, Federer again squandered two match points on his own serve before losing after winning first two sets for second consecutive time in the year. The loss meant that it was the first time since 2002 that Federer had not won any of the four grand slam titles.


In September 2011, in a South African poll, Federer was voted the second most trusted and respected person in the world, next to Nelson Mandela.



Federer finished the season successfully in the indoor season, winning his last three tournaments of the year at the Swiss Indoors, Paris Masters, and ATP World Tour Finals, forming a 16 match winning streak. Federer finished the year ranked No. 3.

2012: Wimbledon title, return to No. 1 and Olympic Silver
Main article: 2012 Roger Federer tennis season

The 2012 season for Federer had his most match wins since 2006 and his highest winning percentage and number of titles won since 2007.[citation needed]

Federer reached the semifinal of the 2012 Australian Open, setting up a 27th career meeting with Nadal, a match Federer lost in four sets.[citation needed] Federer then won the Rotterdam Open for the first time since 2005, defeating Juan Martín del Potro. Federer played in the 2012 Dubai Tennis Championships, where Federer defeated Andy Murray in the final and won the championship title for the fifth time in his career. Federer then moved on to the Indian Wells Masters, where Federer defeated Rafael Nadal in the semifinals, and John Isner in the final. Federer won the title for a record fourth time, and, in doing so, equalled Nadal's record of 19 ATP Masters 1000 titles.[citation needed]
Federer won a record 17th Major, a record-equaling 7th Wimbledon, and returned to No. 1.

Federer went on to compete at the Madrid Masters on the new blue clay surface, where Federer beat Tomáš Berdych in the final, thus regaining the No. 2 ranking from Rafael Nadal. In the French Open, Federer made the semifinals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets, in a rematch of previous year's semifinal.



At Wimbledon, Federer had a five-set match in the third round against Julien Benneteau on his way to the winning the tournament. Federer defeated Andy Murray in four sets in the 2012 Wimbledon final,
 regaining the No. 1 ranking in the process.
 "It's amazing. It equals me with Pete Sampras, who's my hero. It just feels amazing", Federer said of winning his seventh Wimbledon championship, tying Sampras' Open Era record.
 By defeating top-ranked Djokovic in the semifinals and winning in the finals, Federer returned to the top spot in the world rankings and, in doing so, broke Sampras' record of 286 weeks atop the list.


In the 2012 Summer Olympics, Federer played a 4-hour 26-minute semifinal against del Potro where Federer won 19–17 in the third and final set.
 In a lopsided match, Federer lost to Murray in straight sets in the final, winning a silver medal for his country.


Federer won the Cincinnati open in August, beating Novak Djokovic in the final.
 In the US Open, five-time champ Federer was defeated by Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinals.


At the Shanghai Masters, after defeating Wawrinka in the third round, Federer confirmed his 300th week at No. 1. Federer made it to the finals of the ATP Finals, where Federer lost to Djokovic in two sets.


2013: Injury struggles, fall in rankings
Main article: 2013 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer developed back injuries in March and July and his ranking dropped from No. 2 to No. 6. The 2013 season was the first since 1999 in which Federer failed to reach a final in the first four months of the year.[citation needed]

Federer's first and only title of 2013 came at the Gerry Weber Open (defeating Mikhail Youzhny), where Federer also played doubles with good friend Tommy Haas. With the victory in Halle, Federer tied John McEnroe for the third-most number of ATP titles won by a male player in the Open Era.
 Federer, however, was unable to maintain his form into Wimbledon, suffering his worst Grand Slam tournament defeat since 2003 in the second round against Sergiy Stakhovsky. Not only did the loss end Federer's record streak of 36 consecutive quarterfinals at Grand Slam tournaments,
 it meant Federer would drop out of the top 4 for the first time since July 2003.


During the summer, Federer experimented with various different racquets and played the German Open with a blacked-out 98-inch Wilson racquet, instead of his regular Pro Staff 6.1 90 BLX racquet with the smaller 90-inch hitting area. Federer returned to his regular racquet for the second half of the season.

 After Wimbledon, Federer continued to be upset early in tournaments in Hamburg and Gstaad because of a serious back injury through October, when Federer announced that Federer was parting ways with Paul Annacone, his coach for the last three years.
 Federer made the final in Basel, succumbing to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets, and indicated it was a mistake to have played certain tournaments while suffering from a back injury.


On 27 December 2013, Federer announced that Stefan Edberg was joining his team as co-coach with Severin Lüthi.

2014: Davis Cup glory
Main article: 2014 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer began the season by changing rackets for the first time in his career, from his longtime frame of 90 square inches to one measured at 97 square inches. Federer had long been at a comparative disadvantage in equipment as almost the entire tour, including his top rivals Nadal and Djokovic, used more powerful frames of between 95 and 100 square inches.

 At the Australian Open, Federer defeated Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and Andy Murray to reach his 11th consecutive semifinal in Melbourne, before losing to Rafael Nadal in straight sets.[citation needed]

At the Dubai Tennis Championships, Federer defeated Novak Djokovic in the semifinals, and then defeated Tomáš Berdych in the final to win his sixth Dubai crown and his first title since Halle in 2013.
 Federer made the final at the Indian Wells Masters, but lost to Novak Djokovic in a final-set tiebreaker. At the Davis Cup quarterfinals, Federer won both of his singles rubbers against Kazakhstan, the second of which was the first live deciding rubber of his Davis Cup career. Federer then took a wild card into the Monte-Carlo Masters defeating Novak Djokovic on his way to the finals, but lost to compatriot Stan Wawrinka in a tight final.[citation needed]

In June, Federer announced that after the end of his third term, Federer would resign as President of the ATP Players Council, a position Federer had held since 2008.


 At the Halle Open, Federer reached both the singles and the doubles finals and won his seventh Halle singles title, beating Alejandro Falla in the final. At Wimbledon, Federer reached a record ninth final, but Federer was defeated by Djokovic in an epic five-set match.[citation needed]
Federer receiving serve against Richard Gasquet in the title clinching match for Switzerland at the 2014 Davis Cup

Federer made the final of the Canadian Open but was defeated by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. Federer defeated Spain's David Ferrer in three sets to capture his sixth Cincinnati crown and 22nd ATP World Tour Masters 1000 title, his first in Cincinnati since 2012. Federer then reached the semifinals at the US Open but lost in straight sets to eventual champion Marin Čilić. At the Davis Cup semifinals, Federer won both his singles matches against Italy in straight sets and led Switzerland to the final for the first time since 1992.


Federer then played in the Shanghai Masters. Federer beat Novak Djokovic in the semifinals, ending the Serb's 28-match unbeaten run on Chinese soil. Federer battled Frenchman Gilles Simon in his second Shanghai final, defeating him in two tiebreak sets and collected the 23rd Masters 1000 title of his career. The victory saw Federer return to the No. 2 ranking for the first time since May 2013. Federer then played the Swiss Indoors in October, where Federer won a record sixth title and his 82nd ATP men's singles title overall. Federer also reached the finals of the 2014 ATP World Tour Finals to face Djokovic again, but withdrew from the final because of another back injury from his semifinal match against Stan Wawrinka.[citation needed]

Despite his injury, Federer finished the season on a high by defeating Richard Gasquet to clinch the Davis Cup for Switzerland for the first time in its history.
 The final was held at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy in Lille, France attracting over 27,000 spectators per match; this broke attendance record for the highest ever officially sanctioned competition tennis match.

2015: 1,000th victory, Wimbledon & US Open finals
Main article: 2015 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer started his season at the Brisbane International. Federer defeated Milos Raonic in the final, thereby becoming only the third man in the Open Era to have 1,000 or more wins, joining Jimmy Connors and Ivan Lendl, as well as the first man in the Open Era to win at least one title in each of 15 consecutive years.
 In Dubai, Federer successfully defended his title with a straight-set victory over Novak Djokovic in the final, marking his seventh title at the tournament and, after Wimbledon and Halle, was the third time Federer had won seven or more titles in a tournament.
 Additionally, Federer became the fourth person since 1991 to surpass 9,000 career aces.
 In March, Federer reached the final of the Indian Wells, but lost in three sets to defending champion Djokovic.


Federer won his third title of the season at the inaugural Istanbul Open clay-court tournament, ending a title drought on red clay since the 2009 French Open. Federer made it to the final of the Italian Open in May, but was unable to win his first title there, losing to Djokovic in the final.
 In the French Open Federer made it through the first rounds losing just one set, to Gaël Monfils in the 4th. In the quarterfinals, Federer was eventually beaten in straight sets by the later champion Stan Wawrinka.


As the new expanded grass season began, Federer won his record eighth Gerry Weber Open and become only the third man in the Open Era to win a title eight times.
 Federer entered Wimbledon as the second seed. Federer played a flawless match to defeat Andy Murray in straight sets in the semifinals and advance to his 10th Wimbledon final in a repeat against Novak Djokovic. Federer lost the match in four sets.


He defeated Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic in straight sets to win the Cincinnati Masters for the seventh time. This marked the first time that Federer had beaten the top two players in the world at the same tournament.
 At the US Open, Federer advanced to his first final there since 2009 without dropping a set, including a win over Stan Wawrinka in the semifinals.
 In the final, Federer was once again defeated by top seed Djokovic in four sets.
 At the Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel, Federer won his sixth singles title of the year, and his 88th ATP title, defeating his old rival Rafael Nadal in the final.
 It was the seventh time Federer had captured his hometown tournament.


In December, Federer announced that Federer would enter the 2016 ATP World Tour season with a new-look coaching team, having additionally announced that Stefan Edberg would not be travelling with him next year. While countryman Severin Lüthi remained Federer's head coach, joining the team in 2016 was Croatian former world No. 3 player Ivan Ljubicic. Federer revealed that Edberg originally signed on to the coaching team for one season only in 2014, but agreed to stay on in 2015.

2016: Knee surgery, back injury & long recovery hiatus
Main article: 2016 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer started his season in the Brisbane International as the defending champion, despite having a virus when the tournament started. However, in a rematch of the previous year's final, Federer lost in the final to Milos Raonic in straight sets.
 Federer then participated at the 2016 Australian Open and rebounded from his third round defeat by Andreas Seppi in 2015 by reaching the semifinals but lost to eventual champion Novak Djokovic in four sets.
 The day after his loss to Djokovic, Federer sustained a knee injury and in early February, Federer underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair a torn meniscus in his knee and missed the tournaments in Rotterdam, Dubai and Indian Wells in February and March. Federer was scheduled to return to action in Miami.
 Due to a stomach virus Federer had to withdraw from Miami thus prolonging his time on the sidelines.


Federer made his comeback at the Monte-Carlo Masters, losing in the quarterfinals to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in three sets. In Madrid, Federer suffered a back injury during practice and withdrew shortly after arriving. Federer then participated in the Internazionali BNL d'Italia where Federer lost in the third round to Dominic Thiem. His withdrawal from the French Open broke a record run of 65 consecutive participations in the main draw of Grand Slam tournaments, stretching back to the 2000 Australian Open.


Still suffering from recurring knee pain during the grass season Federer lost in the semifinals of Stuttgart and Halle. On 6 July, Federer came back from two sets down to defeat Marin Čilić in five sets in the 2016 Wimbledon quarterfinals, equalling Jimmy Connors' all-time records of eleven Wimbledon semifinals and 84 match wins.
 Federer suffered his first defeat in a Wimbledon semifinal two days later in a five-set loss to Raonic, re-injuring his knee in the fifth set.


On 26 July, Federer announced that Federer would miss the 2016 Summer Olympics and the remainder of the 2016 season to fully recover from his knee injury.
 The sudden withdrawal not only implied that 2016 was his first season since 2000 that Federer failed to win a title, but it also meant that Federer would have to drop out of top ten for the first time in fourteen years. This, combined with a grand slam drought spanning over four years, led to many analysts believing that his outstanding career was finally coming to an end and Federer would never win any major titles again.


2017: Renaissance, Australian Open & Wimbledon titles
Main article: 2017 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer's 2017 season marked a return to Grand Slam wins since 2012, the most titles since 2007, and the highest win percentage since 2006. Statistically, this season was his best since 2007.[citation needed] Federer played in the Hopman Cup and Australian Open in January 2017.
 His withdrawal from most of the injury affected 2016 season lead his ranking slip to No. 17 at the start of Australian Open, his lowest in over fifteen years. At the Australian Open, Federer beat top-10 players Tomáš Berdych and Kei Nishikori on his way to semifinals, making Federer the oldest man to compete in a grand slam semi-final since Jimmy Connors in 1991.
 In the semi-finals, Federer defeated Stanislas Wawrinka in five sets, making him the oldest player to compete in a Grand Slam final since Ken Rosewall in 1974.

 Coming back from a break down in the fifth set, Federer defeated Rafael Nadal to win the Australian Open, which also marked Federer's 100th match at the Australian Open; it was the first time Federer had won a match against Nadal in a Grand Slam event since the 2007 Wimbledon final, and also marked Federer's first ever Grand Slam victory over Nadal outside the grass courts of Wimbledon. With this victory, Federer re-entered the top ten.




In March, Federer won his 25th Masters title at Indian Wells, defeating Wawrinka in the final and gaining another victory over Nadal in the 4th round. This was also Federer's 90th career title and Federer climbed to No. 6 in the ATP rankings.
 Federer collected his 26th Masters title by defeating Nadal in the final of the Miami Masters in straight sets and climbed to No. 4 in the ATP rankings. This marked the third time Federer had won in Indian Wells and Miami back-to-back, colloquially referred to as the Sunshine Double (2005, 2006 and 2017).


Due to concerns about his longevity, Federer decided that Federer would skip the entire clay-court season.
 Federer returned to the tour at the beginning of the grass-court season in Stuttgart, where Federer suffered a shock defeat to Tommy Haas in the second round despite holding match points, the lowest-ranked player (No. 302) to beat him since No. 407 Bjoern Phau in 1999.
 Federer rebounded the following week by winning a record-extending ninth title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, doing so without the loss of a set.
 In the 2017 Wimbledon Championships, Federer made it to the final without dropping a set, defeating Milos Raonic in the quarterfinals and Tomáš Berdych in the semifinals. In the final, Federer defeated a physically and mentally out of sorts Marin Čilić in straight sets to win a record-breaking eighth Wimbledon gentlemen's singles title and his record-extending 19th major title overall, becoming the oldest male player to win Wimbledon in the Open era.
 Federer became the second man in the Open era to win Wimbledon without dropping a set after Björn Borg in 1976.
 It marked the second time in his career that Federer had won a grand slam tournament without losing a set, matching his performance at the 2007 Australian Open.
 Federer moved up to become No. 3 in the ATP Rankings after the event and qualified for the ATP Finals for a record 15th time.


At the opening of the summer hard court swing Federer was defeated in the final of the Montreal Masters by Alexander Zverev after injuring his back during the match. Due to the injury, Federer opted to withdraw from the Cincinnati Masters to be fit for the US Open. However, Federer lost to del Potro in the quarterfinals at the US Open, in a tournament characterized by inconsistent play from Federer, unlike the major portion of the season.[citation needed]

Federer's next participation was in September in the inaugural Laver Cup, representing team Europe. Federer won both his singles matches against Sam Querrey and Nick Kyrgios, with the latter win sealing the cup for Europe.
 The tournament was also notable for Federer playing doubles teaming with longtime rival Nadal for the first time. The two legends emerged victorious against world duo of Sam Querrey and Jack Sock.[citation needed]

At the Shanghai Masters, Federer captured his third Masters title of the season, defeating No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the final. This was Federer's fifth straight victory over Nadal in their rivalry and his 94th career title, drawing him level with 2nd-placed Ivan Lendl.
 During the indoor season, Federer defeated Juan Martin Del Potro in the final of his hometown tournament, the Swiss Indoors in Basel, earning a record eighth championship there and winning his 95th career title, surpassing Ivan Lendl in number of career titles. Federer qualified for the 2017 ATP Finals, but was beaten by David Goffin in the semifinals in three sets.[citation needed]
2018: 20th Major title and 310 weeks at No. 1
Main article: 2018 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer started his season winning the Hopman Cup partnering with Belinda Bencic. This was his second Hopman Cup title, having won previously in 2001 with Martina Hingis.
 At the 2018 Australian Open, Federer reached the final without dropping a set, and successfully defended his title beating Marin Čilić in a five-set final. This was Federer's sixth title at the Australian Open, equaling the then record held by Roy Emerson and Novak Djokovic, which was surpassed by Djokovic in 2019. Federer also became the first man to win twenty Grand Slam titles. It was also the first time since the 2008 US Open that Federer successfully defended a major title.


In mid-February, Federer won his third Rotterdam Open title to return to No. 1 in the ATP rankings, clinching the spot with a quarterfinal victory over Robin Haase.
 Federer beat Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets in the final. At 36 years and 195 days of age, Federer became the oldest ATP world No. 1 by more than three years. Federer also broke the ATP record for the longest span between a player's first and last weeks to attain the No. 1 ranking at 14 years and 17 days apart, as well as the most time between two successive reigns at No. 1 at 5 years and 106 days.


In March, Federer entered the Indian Wells Masters as the defending champion. Federer defeated Chung Hyeon in the quarterfinals, ensuring that Federer retained the world No. 1 ranking, and Borna Ćorić in the semifinals, solidifying a career-best start to a season at 17–0. His previous best season start had been 16–0 during the 2006 season.
 Despite holding three championship points, Federer was defeated by Juan Martin Del Potro in a close three-set final. At the Miami Open, Federer received a first-round bye, but lost in the second round to Thanasi Kokkinakis. With this early exit from the tournament, Federer lost his No. 1 ranking to Nadal on 2 April. Federer announced that Federer would miss the clay court season, including the French Open, for the second consecutive season.
 Nevertheless, Federer regained the No. 1 ranking in May after Nadal failed to defend one of his Masters titles at the Madrid Open.
 Federer then lost the top spot the following week after Nadal won the title at the Italian Open.[citation needed]

In June, Federer regained the No. 1 ranking after defeating Nick Kyrgios in the semifinals at the Stuttgart Open.
 Federer then won the tournament, defeating Milos Raonic in the final in straight sets.
 However, Federer lost his No.1 ranking the following week when Federer failed to defend his Halle Open title, losing in the final to Borna Ćorić in three sets.
 At Wimbledon, Federer was looking to defend his 2017 title and was seeded first at a Grand Slam for the first time since the 2012 US Open but lost in the quarter finals against South African Kevin Anderson in five sets, despite winning the first two sets and having a match point in the third set.
 This was only his second Wimbledon defeat after winning the first two sets since his defeat to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga at the 2011 Wimbledon Championships.


Federer next played in Cincinnati where Federer lost in the final to Novak Djokovic, who won a record Career Golden Masters, in straight sets.
 The loss ended Federer's run of 100 consecutive service holds and 14 match winning streak in Cincinnati. Federer entered the US Open as the second seed but was upset by John Millman in the 4th round, citing extreme conditions of heat and humidity that took a toll on his body.
 Federer then played at the Laver Cup where Federer successfully helped Team Europe defend their title, winning both his singles matches against Nick Kyrgios and John Isner.
 Federer also paired up with Djokovic for the first time in doubles, losing their match against Jack Sock and Kevin Anderson in three sets.
 Federer then played at the 2018 Shanghai Masters as the defending champion but lost in the semifinals to Borna Ćorić in straight sets.


At the Swiss Indoors in October, Federer shared that Federer had sustained a hand injury in training prior to the grass season that had caused severe pain up his forearm. Federer stated that this injury significantly hindered his play, particularly his forehand, since the Stuttgart Open.

 Federer went on to defend his title with a straight-sets win over Marius Copil in the final, winning his ninth title at the event and his 99th career singles title.
 Federer entered the Paris Masters, continuing his good run of form defeating Fabio Fognini and Kei Nishikori in straight sets. In the semi-finals, Federer played a very close match with Novak Djokovic, but ultimately lost to him in three sets. At the Nitto ATP Finals, Federer lost in straight sets to Alexander Zverev in the semifinal.[citation needed]
2019: Hopman Cup record, 100 titles, 1200 match wins, 12th Wimbledon final
Main article: 2019 Roger Federer tennis season

Federer opened his campaign by retaining the Hopman Cup alongside Belinda Bencic, becoming the first player to win the mixed-gender event three times.


Federer was seeded third at the Australian Open, entering as the two-time defending champion. Federer defeated Denis Istomin, Dan Evans, and Taylor Fritz to reach the fourth round, where Federer faced 14th seed Stefanos Tsitsipas. In a stunning upset, Tsitsipas defeated Federer in four close sets. Critically, Federer was unable to convert any of the twelve break points Federer held throughout the match, including four set points in the second set. After the match Federer announced Federer will play the clay court season for the first time since 2016.



At the Dubai Tennis Championships, Federer won his 100th Career Singles Title, beating Tsitsipas in straight sets in the final. It was his eighth title in Dubai and Federer became only the second man after Jimmy Connors to reach the three figure mark in the Open Era.
 Federer then reached the final of the 2019 Indian Wells Masters where Federer lost to Dominic Thiem in three sets.
 On 31 March, Federer defeated John Isner at the 2019 Miami Open in straights sets to win his 4th Miami Open title and 28th Masters 1000 title.
 Federer then played his first clay court tournament in three years at the 2019 Madrid Open and secured his 1200th career win, beating Gael Monfils in the third round. In the quarterfinals Federer lost to Dominic Thiem again in three sets, despite having two match points in the second set.
 Federer then played at the Italian Open and reached the quarterfinals but was forced to withdraw from his quarterfinal match against Stefanos Tsitsipas due to a right leg injury.


Federer next played at the French Open for the first time in 4 years and seeded 3rd in the draw. Federer achieved comfortable straight-set victories against Lorenzo Sonego, Oscar Otte, Casper Ruud and Leonardo Mayer to reach the quarterfinals, where Federer faced good friend and compatriot Stan Wawrinka. Federer managed to avenge his loss to Wawrinka at the same stage of the tournament 4 years ago, winning in 4 sets after 3 hours and 35 minutes. With the victory Federer returned to the semifinals of the French Open for the first time since 2012, where Federer lost to 11-time champion Rafael Nadal in straight sets.


Federer then began his grass court season at the 2019 Halle Open where Federer won his tenth title at the event, defeating David Goffin in the final in straight sets. This marked the first time Federer had won a singles tournament for ten times or more.
 At the Wimbledon championships, Roger Federer reached his record 12th final at the tournament after ousting his nemesis Rafael Nadal in four sets in the semifinal, thus exacting revenge for his earlier defeat to him at the French Open. This was also the first time Federer played Nadal at Wimbledon since the 2008 Wimbledon final, a match regarded by some as the greatest match in the history of tennis.
 Federer then faced Novak Djokovic in the final, against whom Federer lost in a five set thriller lasting four hours and fifty seven minutes, despite having two championship points on serve in the fifth set. The match also marked the first time a fifth set tiebreaker was played at 12 games all in the men's singles and was the longest men's final in Wimbledon history.


Federer next played at the 2019 Cincinnati Masters and reached the third round where Federer lost in straight sets to Andrey Rublev. This was his quickest defeat in 16 years, taking just 62 minutes.
 At the 2019 US Open, Federer was seeded third. Federer dropped the first set against both Sumit Nagal and Damir Džumhur in the first two rounds, but pulled out convincing straight sets wins over Dan Evans and David Goffin in the third and fourth. In the quarterfinals, Federer faced Grigor Dimitrov, who was ranked #78 going into the tournament. Despite taking a two sets to one lead, Federer ultimately lost the match in five sets.

 At the 2019 Shanghai Masters, Federer defeated David Goffin in straight sets to reach the quarterfinal.
 However, Federer lost the quarterfinal to Alexander Zverev in three sets.


Federer advanced to the Swiss Indoors as the two-time defending champion. His first round match, against Peter Gojowczyk, is remarkable for being the 1500th match of his career. In the final, Federer defeated Alex de Minaur in straight sets for a record-extending tenth Swiss Indoors title.
 Federer then played in the Björn Borg group at the 2019 ATP Finals where in the round robin, Federer lost his opening match to Dominic Thiem in straight sets but beat Matteo Berrettini and Djokovic (his first win over Djokovic since 2015) in straight sets to qualify for the semifinals.
 Federer then lost the semifinal to Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets.

National representation
Davis Cup

Federer made his Davis Cup for Switzerland debut in the World Group 1st Round against Italy in 1999 at 17 years of age. In his first match Federer defeated Davide Sanguinetti in four sets and recorded a second singles victory in a dead rubber two days later as Switzerland advanced to the World Group Quarterfinals. In the Quarterfinals Federer, who was still 17 years old, suffered his first Davis Cup loss when Federer was defeated by Belgian Christophe Van Garsse in five sets. The Swiss team went on to lose the rubber 3–2. A year later, Federer competed in his first Davis Cup doubles rubber where Federer teamed with countryman Lorenzo Manta to defeat Australians Wayne Arthurs and Sandon Stolle in four sets. Despite the doubles victory, Federer lost both singles rubbers to Mark Philippoussis and Lleyton Hewitt which saw Switzerland sent to the World Group Playoffs for the first time in Federer's career. Federer returned for the playoffs in July 2000 and led Switzerland to a 5–0 win over Belarus by recording wins in singles and doubles.[citation needed]

His first Davis Cup highlight came in 2003 as the newly crowned Wimbledon champion led his country to an historic semifinal run.[citation needed] After recording five wins in ties against the Netherlands and France, the Swiss team traveled to Melbourne to play the highly rated Australians.[citation needed] Federer once again defeated Wimbledon runner-up Mark Philippoussis in the second rubber but allowed the Australians to lead the tie 2–1 going into Day 3 after dropping the doubles rubber in five sets.[citation needed] Federer then played Lleyton Hewitt in a sudden death situation for Switzerland and despite leading two sets to love,[citation needed] succumbed to a fast finishing Hewitt in five sets.[citation needed] Australia went on to claim the Davis Cup title months later[citation needed] as Federer's interest in Davis Cup began to wane[citation needed] and his focus shifted to his personal career.[citation needed] Federer skipped many ties over the years but often competed in the World Group Playoffs in order for Switzerland to maintain their place in the top division.[citation needed]

The emergence of countryman Stanislas Wawrinka as a Grand Slam singles champion in 2014 renewed hope for Federer in his Davis Cup quest, and the pair both committed to playing each tie that year. Their commitment paid off as wins over Serbia, Kazakhstan and Italy allowed the Swiss team to advance to the 2014 Davis Cup Final. Leading into the final, Federer was suffering from a back injury
 that threw serious doubt over Switzerland's chance to claim the title, and a second rubber straight sets loss to Gaël Monfils seemingly spelled the worst for Switzerland. However, a rejuvenated Federer returned the next day to help claim the doubles rubber, which set up a fourth rubber singles tie between Federer and Richard Gasquet. Federer defeated Gasquet in straight sets and in doing so handed Switzerland its first (and only to date) Davis Cup title.[citation needed]

Federer holds many Davis Cup records for Switzerland that includes most total wins, most singles wins and most years played.

Olympic Games

An 18-year-old Federer made his Olympic debut at Sydney in 2000, where Federer entered the singles competition. Federer surprised many by reaching the semifinals but lost to Tommy Haas in the semifinals and then to Arnaud Di Pasquale in the bronze medal match, causing Federer to leave Sydney empty handed.[citation needed]

At the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Federer was the clear favorite after claiming the world No. 1 ranking earlier in the year and capturing the Australian Open and Wimbledon titles. However, Federer lost in the second round to 18-year-old Tomáš Berdych. In doubles, Federer and compatriot Yves Allegro lost in the second round.[citation needed]

At the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, Federer was again the top seed and favorite, but lost in the quarterfinals to James Blake. However, Federer found more success on the doubles court, capturing the gold medal in men's doubles with compatriot Stan Wawrinka, defeating Simon Aspelin and Thomas Johansson of Sweden. At both the Athens and Beijing Olympic Games, Federer was the flagbearer for Switzerland in the opening ceremony.[citation needed]

At London 2012, Federer won his first singles medal, losing to Andy Murray in the final to claim the silver. Federer and Wawrinka were unable to defend their gold medal in doubles, losing in the second round to Jonathan Erlich and Andy Ram of Israel.[citation needed]

Federer did not compete in the 2016 Rio Olympics after taking the rest of the season off after Wimbledon to recover from a knee injury.[citation needed]
Hopman Cup

Federer won the 2001 Hopman Cup representing Switzerland, along with Martina Hingis. The duo defeated the American pair of Monica Seles and Jan-Michael Gambill in the finals.[citation needed] Federer also played the next year, along with his current wife Mirka Vavrinec, but they lost in the round robin stage.[citation needed]

Federer played again at the Hopman Cup in 2017, along with Belinda Bencic. They won all of their ties except the last one, and as a result they couldn't make the final.[citation needed]

In 2018, Federer won his second Hopman Cup title and third overall for Switzerland. His partner was Belinda Bencic again. The Swiss team won all the ties and Federer won all his singles and mixed doubles matches. They defeated the German pair, Alexander Zverev and Angelique Kerber, in the final 2–1.[citation needed]

Federer won his third and second consecutive Hopman Cup title in 2019 alongside Belinda Bencic. They again defeated Alexander Zverev and Angelique Kerber of Germany in the final, and won the final tie 2–1 by winning a tiebreak in the final set of the mixed doubles (5–4). Federer again won all of his singles matches. The Swiss team only lost one tie to Greece (1–2).[citation needed]

Roger Federer is the most successful individual in Hopman Cup history (3 titles).[citation needed]
International representation
Laver Cup

Federer founded the Laver Cup, which pits Europe against the rest of the world. The tournament is named in honor of Rod Laver and the inaugural edition was played in 2017.[citation needed]

Europe won the inaugural Laver Cup in 2017. Federer played his first singles match on day two, when Federer dispatched Sam Querrey in straight sets. Later on day two, Federer partnered with his rival Nadal in doubles, where they defeated the Team World duo of Sam Querrey and Jack Sock in the match tie breaker, which took place at one set all. This was the first time Federer and Nadal competed on the same side of a doubles match. On day three, Federer competed in the final match of the tournament, where Federer sealed victory for Team Europe by defeating Nick Kyrgios in the champion's tiebreak (saving a match point). With three wins and seven points, Federer was the most accomplished player of the tournament.[citation needed]

The second edition was played in 2018. The European team led by Federer retained the title after defeating Team World, 13–8. Federer won both his singles matches, against Nick Kyrgios and John Isner, but lost both his doubles matches.[citation needed]

In 2019 the ATP announced that the Laver Cup would be an official event on the ATP Tour, with match wins and losses to be counted as official on every player's career record in singles and doubles.

The third edition was held in Geneva, Switzerland. Federer and the European team captured their third consecutive title. Team World was closer than ever to win their first title, losing 11–13 after having led during the final day. Like in 2018, Federer won singles matches against Kyrgios and Isner. Federer went 1–1 in doubles.
Rivalries
See also: Big Four (tennis)
Federer vs. Nadal
Main article: Federer–Nadal rivalry
Federer and Nadal ahead of the 2008 Wimbledon final

Federer and Rafael Nadal have played 40 times, with Federer trailing 16–24. Federer has a winning record on grass 3–1 and hard courts 11–9, while Nadal leads on clay 14–2.
 Because tournament seedings are based on rankings, 24 of their matches have been in tournament finals which have included an all-time record nine Grand Slam finals.
 Federer and Nadal have been playing each other since 2004, and their rivalry is a significant part of both men's careers.




 The latest encounter was at the 2019 Wimbledon Championships, where Federer won to reach the final.

They held the top two rankings on the ATP Tour from July 2005 until 17 August 2009, when Nadal fell to No. 3 (Andy Murray became the new No. 2),
 and again from 11 September 2017 until 15 October 2018 (Novak Djokovic became the new No. 2). They are the only pair of men to have ever finished six consecutive calendar years at the top. Federer was ranked No. 1 for a record 237 consecutive weeks beginning in February 2004. Nadal, who is five years younger, ascended to No. 2 in July 2005 and held this spot for 160 consecutive weeks, before surpassing Federer in August 2008.


From 2006 to 2008, they played in every French Open and Wimbledon final. They then met in the 2009 Australian Open final, the 2011 French Open final, and the 2017 Australian Open final. Nadal won six of the nine, losing the first two Wimbledon finals and the second Australian Open final. Four of these finals were five set-matches (2007 and 2008 Wimbledon, 2009 and 2017 Australian Open), with the 2008 Wimbledon final being lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts.



 Of their 40 meetings, 13 have reached a deciding set. They have also played in 12 Masters Series finals, including their lone five-hour match at the 2006 Rome Masters which Nadal won in a fifth-set tie-break, having saved two match points.
Federer vs. Djokovic
Main article: Djokovic–Federer rivalry
Federer and Djokovic, Cincinnati Masters final 2015

Federer and Novak Djokovic have played 49 times, with Federer trailing 23–26.

 They are tied 4–4 on clay while Federer trails 18–19 on hard-courts and 1–3 on grass. The Federer–Djokovic rivalry is the largest rivalry in men's Grand Slam tournament history with a record 16 matches played against each other. Djokovic is the only player besides Nadal to defeat Federer in consecutive Grand Slam tournaments (2010 US Open and 2011 Australian Open, also 2015 Wimbledon, US Open and 2016 Australian Open), and the only player besides Nadal and Murray who has double-figure career wins over Federer. Djokovic is one of two players (the other again being Nadal) on tour to have defeated Federer in straight sets at a Grand Slam event multiple times (2008 Australian Open, 2011 Australian Open, 2012 French Open), both the players have done so three times.

Federer and Djokovic first played in a Grand Slam final at the 2007 US Open where the three-time reigning champion and No. 1 Federer emerged victorious in straight sets. Federer ended Djokovic's perfect 41–0 start to the 2011 season in the semifinals of the French Open, but Djokovic was able to avenge this loss at the 2011 US Open in five sets after saving two match points against Federer for the second straight year.
 In the semifinals of Wimbledon 2012, Federer beat defending champion and No. 1 Djokovic in four sets.
 The two met again during the finals of the 2014 Wimbledon Championships with Djokovic emerging victorious after five sets.
 Federer also ended Djokovic's 28 straight wins in China at 2014 Shanghai Open. Federer and Djokovic rematched in the 2015 Wimbledon Championships with Djokovic once again claiming victory in four sets.
 The pair met once more for the final major of the season, the 2015 US Open and once more Djokovic prevailed in four sets.
 At the 2019 Wimbledon Championships, Djokovic bested Federer in an almost 5 hour match whose final set went to a tiebreak. This was the fifth consecutive time that Djokovic defeated Federer in Grand Slam matches. Some experts have included the rivalry between Federer and Djokovic as one of the best rivalries in the Open Era.

Federer vs. Murray

Federer and Andy Murray have played 25 times, with Federer leading 14–11. Federer leads 12–10 on hard courts, and 2–1 on grass. They have never met on clay.
 The two have met six times at the Grand Slam tournament level, the first three times in the finals, Federer winning all three of these matches; at the 2008 US Open
 and the 2010 Australian Open,
 both of which Federer won in straight sets, and at the 2012 Wimbledon Championships in which Murray took the opening set, but went on to lose in four sets. However, Murray won their encounter in the semifinals of the 2013 Australian Open, defeating Federer for the first time at a Grand slam tournament in five sets. At the 2014 Australian Open, Federer reversed that result, defeating Murray in four sets in the quarterfinals. The most recent meeting between the two in a Major was in the semifinals of the 2015 Wimbledon Championships, where a dominant Federer triumphed in straight sets.

They met in the final of the 2012 Summer Olympics, in which Murray defeated Federer in straight sets, denying Federer a career Golden Slam. Murray also leads 6–3 in ATP 1000 tournaments, 2–0 in finals. They have also met five times at the ATP World Tour Finals, with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008,
 and Federer in London in 2009, 2010, 2012, and 2014.
 Murray is one of only three players to have recorded ten or more victories over Federer (the other two being Nadal and Novak Djokovic).
Federer vs. Roddick
Main article: Federer–Roddick rivalry

Federer and Andy Roddick played 24 times, and Federer leads their head-to-head 21–3. Roddick lost his No. 1 ranking to Federer after Federer won his first Australian Open in 2004. Their rivalry includes four Grand Slam event finals, three at Wimbledon and one at the US Open, all won by Federer.
 Roddick himself said it was not much of a rivalry, being so one-sided.


In the 2009 Wimbledon final, Roddick lost to Federer in five sets. The match included a 30-game fifth set (a Grand Slam final record) and lasted over four hours. In the final game of the deciding set, Roddick's serve was broken for the first time in the match. With that victory, Federer broke Pete Sampras' record of 14 Grand Slam singles titles, and Roddick apologised to Sampras (who was in attendance) for not being able to stop Federer.
Federer vs. Hewitt

Federer and Lleyton Hewitt played 27 times, with Federer leading 18–9.
 Early in their careers, Hewitt dominated Federer, winning seven of their first nine meetings, including a victory from two sets down in the 2003 Davis Cup semifinal which allowed Australia to defeat Switzerland. This marked a turning point in the rivalry, as Federer won 16 of the next 18 meetings from 2004 onwards. This is Hewitt's longest rivalry as these two first played each other as juniors in 1996. They met in one Grand Slam tournament final, the 2004 US Open final, where Federer won his first US Open title in a lopsided encounter in which Federer scored a bagel on both sides of a second-set tiebreak. Federer met Hewitt at six of the Grand Slam tournaments in which Federer lifted the trophy, including all five of his triumphs between 2004 and 2005. Their last meeting was at the 2014 Brisbane International, where Hewitt triumphed over Federer in three sets for his first title since 2010, when Federer also beat Federer to the Halle title.

Hewitt and Federer teamed up in the men's doubles at Wimbledon in 1999. They lost in the third round to Jonas Björkman and Pat Rafter.

Federer vs. Nalbandian

Federer and David Nalbandian played 19 times, with Federer leading 11–8.
 David Nalbandian was Federer's biggest rival in his early career. Nalbandian dominated early on, winning their first five matches from 2002 to 2003. Federer reversed this trend at the 2003 Masters Cup, where Federer recorded his first victory, and went on to win 11 of their last 14 meetings. Federer leads 6–5 on hard courts, 1–0 on grass, and 3–1 on clay courts, while Nalbandian leads 2–1 on carpet. Notable meetings include Nalbandian's win in a fifth-set tiebreaker to win the 2005 Masters Cup, and Federer's win in the 2006 French Open semifinals. They met each other six times in Grand Slam tournaments, with Federer leading 4–2.
Federer vs. Safin

Marat Safin and Federer played 12 times, with Federer leading 10–2.
 Federer and Safin turned pro within one year of each other, with Safin turning pro in 1997 and Federer in 1998. Federer leads 4–1 on hard courts, 3–0 on grass, and 3–0 on clay courts, while Safin leads 1–0 on carpet. Notable meetings include Federer's defeating Safin at the 2002 Hamburg Masters to win the first Masters 1000 title of his career, as well as Federer's emerging victorious in the semifinals of the 2004 Tennis Masters Cup, after winning a tiebreak 20–18 on his eighth match point. Federer also defeated Safin in the finals of the 2004 Australian Open to capture his first Australian Open and second Grand Slam tournament title. However, Safin defeated Federer in the 2005 Australian Open semifinals, having saved one match point in the fourth-set tiebreak, to end a 26-match winning streak by Federer.
 They met each other five times in Grand Slam tournaments, with Federer leading 4–1.
Federer vs. Agassi

Federer and Andre Agassi played 11 times, and Federer leads their head-to-head 8–3.
 This was Federer's most significant rivalry with a dominant player of the previous generation. They first met in only the third tournament of Federer's career at the 1998 Swiss Indoors in Federer's hometown, with Andre Agassi prevailing over the 17-year-old. Agassi also defeated Federer at the 2001 US Open and the finals of the Miami Masters in 2002. Federer began to turn the tide at the Masters Cup in 2003, when Federer defeated Agassi in both the round robin and the final. They played a memorable quarterfinal match at the 2004 US Open that spanned over two days, with Federer eventually prevailing in five sets. At the 2005 Dubai Championships, Federer and Agassi attracted worldwide headlines with a publicity stunt that saw the two men play on a helipad almost 220 meters above sea level at the hotel Burj al-Arab. Their final match was at one of the most prestigious platforms in the sport, when they played in the finals of the 2005 US Open. Federer was victorious in four sets, claiming the 6th Grand Slam tournament of his career and denying Agassi his 9th.
Federer vs. Wawrinka

Federer and his fellow Swiss player Stan Wawrinka have played each other 26 times, with Federer leading 23–3. Federer leads 7–1 in Grand Slam tournaments, 17–0 on hard courts, 1–0 on grass courts and 5–3 on clay courts. The pair are 1–1 in finals. Their first meeting in a final came at 2014 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters where Wawrinka defeated Federer in three sets to win his first Masters 1000 title before Federer avenged his loss at the 2017 BNP Paribas Open by beating him in the final.
 While the rivalry is one-sided in Federer's favour, the two have contested some close matches. Wawrinka defeated Federer in straight sets during the 2015 French Open quarterfinals en route to winning his first French Open title, although Federer then won a straight-sets victory in the 2015 US Open semifinals. Other close matches include the 2012 Shanghai Masters and the 2013 Indian Wells Masters, both of which Federer won in three sets, the 2014 Wimbledon quarterfinal, which Federer won in four sets, the 2014 ATP World Tour Final semifinal, which Federer won in three sets after saving four match points, and the 2017 Australian Open semifinal, which Federer won in five sets. Despite their on-court rivalry, they are friends off court,
 and they have played doubles together on numerous occasions,
 most notably when they won the doubles Olympic Gold at the 2008 Beijing Olympics and when winning the 2014 Davis Cup.
Federer vs. del Potro

Juan Martín del Potro and Roger Federer have played 25 times, with Federer leading 18–7.
 They have met seven times in Grand Slam tournaments, with Federer leading 5–2. Their two most famous Grand Slam tournament meetings came in 2009. The first was in the French Open semifinals, when Federer survived a five-set clash when Federer was on his way to the only French title of his career. The second was in the final of the US Open, where del Potro beat five-time defending champion Federer in five sets, ending his 20-match winning streak at Grand Slams. Another high-profile match was in the semifinals of the 2012 London Olympics, where Federer prevailed 19–17 in the final set to secure the Olympic silver medal. They also met in the finals of the Swiss Indoors in 2012, 2013 and 2017, with del Potro prevailing on first two occasions, and Federer on last one of them in tight three-set matches.

In the 2017 U.S. Open quarterfinals, in a rematch of the 2009 US Open final, Del Potro again beat Federer in four sets to end his unbeaten streak in grand slams that year. With this win, Del Potro also denied the first Federer-Nadal match at US Open, as in 2009 where Federer beat Nadal in straight sets in the semifinals. Federer, however avenged this loss at the Shanghai Masters semifinals, where Federer beat del Potro in three sets after coming from a set down. In the final at the 2018 BNP Paribas Open del Potro beat Federer in three close sets, after facing match points in the third set. With this win del Potro won his first Masters 1000 title of his career.

Federer vs. Berdych

Tomáš Berdych and Federer played 26 times, with Federer leading 20–6.
 Federer leads 12–5 on hard courts, 3–1 on grass courts, 4–0 on clay courts, and 1–0 on carpet. Berdych won their first professional match, notably upsetting then-No. 1 Federer at the 2004 Summer Olympics. Federer then went on to win their next eight meetings, before Berdych ended the losing streak in 2010. Between 2010 and 2013, Berdych won 5 of 8 meetings. Federer again took lead of the matchup after Federer switched to a larger racquet in 2014, leading 9–0 since then. They met ten times in Grand Slam tournaments, with Federer leading 8–2, and Berdych is one of five players, along with Arnaud Clément, Álex Corretja, David Nalbandian, and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, to defeat Federer multiple times in majors before the semifinal stage. Their most notable Grand Slam matches took place in the 2009 Australian Open, when Federer prevailed in five sets after dropping the first two sets, the 2010 Wimbledon Championships and the 2012 US Open, both of which Berdych won in four sets. Berdych went on to reach the only Grand Slam final of his career after the Wimbledon quarterfinal victory, ending Federer's run of seven consecutive finals at Wimbledon dating back to 2003.

Federer vs. Tsonga

Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and Federer have played 18 times, with Federer leading 12–6. Federer leads 5–3 on outdoor hard courts and 4–0 on indoor hard. They are 1–1 on grass and 2–2 on clay courts.
 The pair have met six times in Grand Slam tournaments, including their five-set matches in the quarterfinals of 2011 Wimbledon and 2013 Australian Open. They have also one Grand Slam semifinal meeting in the 2010 Australian Open, with Federer winning in straight sets. Federer and Tsonga have played in the 2011 ATP World Tour Finals final, with Federer winning his record-sixth Year-End Championship in three sets. The pair have also met in two ATP World Tour Masters 1000 finals. The first was in the 2011 BNP Paribas Masters, with Federer winning his first title in Bercy, and the second was in the 2014 Rogers Cup, with Tsonga winning his second Masters 1000 title.
Federer vs. Čilić

Federer and Marin Čilić have played 10 times, with Federer leading 9–1.
 Čilić's only victory came in the 2014 US Open semifinals, after which Federer went on to win the Grand Slam title. Their first encounter was in the 3rd round in the 2008 Paris Masters, which Federer won in straight sets. They have played five Grand Slam matches, two in Wimbledon, two in the US Open, and one at the 2018 Australian Open; Federer leads these matches 4–1. Two of these have been Grand Slam finals – the 2017 Wimbledon final, which Federer won in straight sets, and the 2018 Australian Open final, which Federer won in five sets.
Achievements
Main article: List of career achievements by Roger Federer
A tennis player holds a racket in his hand
Roger Federer has spent a total of 310 weeks and 237 consecutive weeks at the top of the ATP rankings, the most of any player.

He dominated the game at his peak and has won more Grand Slam tournament titles (20) than any other men's singles player.

 Federer is also the first men's singles player to have reached ten consecutive Grand Slam tournament finals and a total of 31 Grand Slam finals.

 Federer has earned a men's doubles gold medal, and a men's single silver medal at the Olympics in 2008 and 2012, respectively.
 Federer has spent the most amount of time in the Open Era at the top of the ATP Rankings (310 weeks). Federer also holds the record for the most titles (6) at the year-end tournament, where only the year-end eight highest-ranked players participate. Federer was ranked among the top eight players in the world continuously for 14 years and two weeks—from 14 October 2002 until 31 October 2016, when injuries forced him to skip much of the 2016 season.


Federer has won the ATP Player of the Year five times (2004–07, 2009), and has become ITF World Champion five times (2004–07, 2009). Federer has won the ATPWorldTour.com Fans' Favourite Award a record 16 times consecutively (2003–18), and has won the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award (voted for by the players) a record 13 times (2004–09, 2011–17),
 both being awards indicative of respect and popularity. Federer also won the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year Award twice (2006, 2013), the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year five times (2005–08, 2018), and the Laureus World Comeback of the Year once, following his 2017 renaissance.


Federer is one of the founders, via his management company TEAM8, of the Laver Cup; the annual team tennis tournament which pits Europe against the rest of the world. Federer co-founded the tournament in honor of tennis legend Rod Laver and the inaugural edition was played in 2017.

In 2018, Federer returned to the Australian Open to defend his 2017 title and won his 20th Grand Slam tournament. Rafael Nadal, with his 2019 US Open win, sits one behind Roger.
Legacy and cultural impact

Roger Federer has huge popularity in the world of sport, to the point that Federer has been called a living legend in his own time.

 Given his achievements, Federer is widely considered to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time, with many players and analysts considering him to be the greatest tennis player of all time.
 Federer has also been called the greatest athlete of his generation.

 Tennis.com listed him as the greatest male player of the open era.


No other male tennis player has won 20 major singles titles in the Open Era, and Federer has been in 31 major finals, including 10 in a row. Federer has held the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings for longer than any other male player. Federer was ranked No. 1 at the age of 36 and has won a record eight Wimbledon titles. Federer won five consecutive US Open titles, which is the most in the Open Era.

He has been voted by his peers to receive the tour Sportsmanship Award a record thirteen times and voted by tennis fans to receive the ATP Fans' Favorite award for fifteen consecutive years.
 Federer has been named the Swiss Sports Personality of the Year a record seven times. Federer has been named the ATP Player of the Year and ITF World Champion five times, and Federer has won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award a record five times, including four consecutive awards from 2005 to 2008. Federer is also the only individual to have won the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year award four times.

Federer helped to lead a revival in tennis known by many as the Golden Age. This led to increased interest in the sport, which in turn led to higher revenues for many venues across tennis. During this period rising revenues led to exploding prize money; when Federer first won the Australian Open in 2004 Federer earned $985,000, compared to when Federer won in 2018 and the prize had increased to AUD 4 million.


Upon winning the 2009 French Open and completing the career Grand Slam, Federer became the first individual male tennis player to grace the cover of Sports Illustrated since Andre Agassi in 1999.
 Federer was also the first non-American player to appear on the cover of the magazine since Stefan Edberg in 1992.
 Federer again made the cover of Sports Illustrated following his record-breaking 8th Wimbledon title and second Grand Slam of 2017, becoming the first male tennis player to be featured on the cover since himself in 2009.


Federer is nicknamed the "G.O.A.T." (Greatest Of All Time), the "Federer Express" (shortened to "Fed Express" or "FedEx"),


 and the "Swiss Maestro."

 Federer has also been referred to as "King Roger" on occasion.

Philanthropy and outreach
Roger Federer Foundation

In 2003, Federer established the Roger Federer Foundation to help disadvantaged children and to promote their access to education and sport.




Since May 2004, citing his close ties with South Africa (his mother is South African) Federer has been supporting the South Africa-Swiss charity IMBEWU, which helps children better connect to sports as well as social and health awareness. In 2005, Federer visited South Africa to meet the children that had benefited from his support.


 Also in 2005, Federer auctioned his racquet from his US Open championship to aid victims of Hurricane Katrina.


At the 2005 Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, Federer arranged an exhibition involving several top players from the ATP and WTA tour called Rally for Relief. The proceeds went to the victims of the tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In December 2006, Federer visited Tamil Nadu, one of the areas in India most affected by the tsunami.
 Federer was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador by UNICEF in April 2006 and has appeared in UNICEF public messages to raise public awareness of AIDS.



In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Federer arranged a collaboration with fellow top tennis players for a special charity event during the 2010 Australian Open called 'Hit for Haiti', in which proceeds went to Haiti earthquake victims.

 Federer participated in a follow-up charity exhibition during the 2010 Indian Wells Masters, which raised $1 million.


The Nadal vs. Federer "Match for Africa" in 2010 in Zurich and Madrid raised more than $4 million for the Roger Federer Foundation and Fundación Rafa Nadal. In January 2011, Federer took part in an exhibition, Rally for Relief, to raise money for the victims of the Queensland floods.

 In 2014, the "Match for Africa 2" between Federer and Stan Wawrinka, again in Zurich, raised £850,000 for education projects in Southern Africa.[citation needed]
Special edition Stamps

In 2007, the Swiss Post in Basel released a special edition stamp for Federer. Three years later, in 2010, Federer awarded a special edition stamp by Austria's Postal Service.[citation needed]
World's most respected, admired and trusted personalities

In 2011, on the Reputation Institute’s study of the World’s most respected, admired and trusted personalities, Federer ranked No. 2 just behind Nelson Mandela but ahead of Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Oprah Winfrey and Bono.[citation needed]
Roger Federer streets

In 2012, the city of Halle, in Germany, unveiled “Roger-Federer-Allee” in recognition of Federer’s success on the grass at the Gerry Weber Open.[citation needed] In 2016, the city of Biel, in Switzerland, where is the national centre for Swiss Tennis that Roger trained as a junior, named the street in his honour as “1 Allée Roger Federer”.[citation needed]
Switzerland's most recognizable personalities

Roger Federer ranked No. 1 in the list for the most recognizable people in Switzerland, surpassing personalities such as Albert Einstein and William Tell.[citation needed] In a poll of more than 9,000 people from 15 countries, the Swiss legend topped the list of most recognizable Swiss with 600 votes more than the country's second national hero, William Tell, who came up at the second place. Federer got 916 votes, Tell got 316 and Einstein ranked third with 204. The other three in the first six were Henry Dunant, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and cartoon character Heidi.[citation needed]
Honorary doctorate degree

On 24 November 2017, Federer received an honorary doctorate awarded to him by his home university, the University of Basel. Federer received the title in recognition for his role in increasing the international reputation of Basel and Switzerland, and also his engagement for children in Africa through his charitable foundation.

Swiss coin

In December 2019, Federer became the first living person to be celebrated on Swiss coins. His face will be on the 20-franc coin and in May 2020, Swissmint plans to issue a Federer 50-franc gold coin featuring a different design.[citation needed]
Playing style

Federer's versatility has been described by Jimmy Connors as: "In an era of specialists, you're either a clay court specialist, a grass court specialist, or a hard court specialist... or you're Roger Federer."


Dominik Hrbaty described what it was like to play Federer in the Scoop Malinowski book "Facing Federer": “Roger is different. He’s the new generation. Federer was comparable to Marcelo Rios, very talented, Federer has great hands, but the difference was Roger had the big serve, big return. Federer could make winners out of anything basically. And even out of defense. And Roger is just one of a kind." 

Federer serving at the Australian Open in 2014

An elite athlete, Federer is an all-court, all-around player known for his speed, fluid style of play, and exceptional shot making. Federer mainly plays from the baseline but is also comfortable at the net, being one of the best volleyers in the game.
 Federer has a powerful, accurate smash and very effectively performs rare elements of professional tennis, such as the backhand smash and skyhook, half-volley, jump smash (slam dunk) and an aggressive serve return known affectionately as SABR (Sneak Attack By Roger, a half-volley attack on an opponent's second serve). David Foster Wallace compared the brute force of Federer's forehand motion with that of "a great liquid whip",
 while John McEnroe has referred to Federer's forehand as "the greatest shot in our sport."
 Federer is also known for his efficient, deceptively effortless movement around the court and excellent footwork, which enables him to run around shots directed to his backhand, usually considered his weaker wing, and instead hit a powerful and penetrating inside-out or inside-in forehand, one of his best shots. Federer also has great variety with his forehand, able to hit with topspin or pace (or both), thus opening up the court and going in to the forecourt for aggressive volleys.

Federer plays with a single-handed backhand, which gives him great variety. Federer employs the slice, occasionally using it to lure his opponent to the net and deliver a passing shot. Federer can also fire topspin winners and possesses a 'flick' backhand with which Federer can generate pace with his wrist; this is usually used to pass the opponent at the net.
 Federer has averaged 90% of service games won throughout his career, oftentimes coming up victorious in clutch or pressure service games. His serve is difficult to read because Federer always uses a similar ball toss, regardless of what type of serve Federer is going to hit and where Federer aims to hit it, and turns his back to his opponents during his motion. Federer is often able to produce big serves on key points during a match. His first serve is typically around 200 km/h (125 mph);


 however, Federer is capable of serving at 220 km/h (137 mph).

 Federer is also accomplished at serve and volleying,
 and employed this tactic frequently in his early career.



Later in his career, Federer added the drop shot to his arsenal and can perform a well-disguised one off both wings. Federer sometimes uses a between-the-legs shot, which is colloquially referred to as a "tweener" or "hotdog". His most notable use of the tweener was in the semifinals of the 2009 US Open against Novak Djokovic, bringing him triple match point.
 Federer is one of the top players who employ successfully the "squash shot", when Federer gets pushed deep and wide on his forehand wing. Since Stefan Edberg joined his coaching team at the start of the 2014 season, Federer has played a more offensive game, attacking the net more often, and improved his volley shots.

 In the lead-up to the 2015 US Open, Federer successfully added a new unique shot to his arsenal called SABR (Sneak Attack by Roger), in which Federer charges forward to receive the second serve and hits a return on the service line. The SABR is a unique shot that Federer owns, in the way that Federer manages to add enough power and placement into the shot, which makes it very difficult, or close to impossible for the opponent to reach it.
 With the switch to a bigger 97 inch racket from 90 inches, Federer has gained easy power while relinquishing some control on his shots. The bigger racket has enabled easier serving and better defense on both wings with fewer shanks. However this has diminished control and power on his forehand, slice backhand and dropshot.
 Since his comeback in 2017, Federer is noted for his improved backhand both down the line and cross court which was cited as the reason for his win against Nadal in the 2017 Australian Open Final and Indian Wells 4th round.

Federer is also noted for his cool demeanour and emotional control on the court. In contrast to his early career, most of his professional game has been characterised by lack of outbursts or emotional frustration at errors, which gives him an advantage over less controlled opponents.




Federer declared:

    I don't get the anxiety during a match so much anymore. You know, to throw racquets, to toss balls out of the court, scream and stuff. I almost laugh [on the inside] about it a little bit today when an opponent does it. But that's something for me that's not a problem any more.
 

Equipment and apparel
Equipment

Federer plays with his signature Wilson Pro Staff RF97 Autograph racquet. It has a 97 square inch head, 16x19 string pattern, 366 gram strung weight, 340 gram swing weight, 68 RA stiffness, and 9 point head light balance.
 Federer strings his racquets using Wilson Natural Gut 16 gauge for his main strings and Luxilon Big Banger ALU Power Rough 16L gauge (polyester) for his cross strings. In an interview in November 2017, Federer stated his favorite stringing tension is 26.5 kilograms (58.4 lb) mains & 25 kilograms (55.1 lb) crosses.


As a junior player, Federer played with a Wilson Pro Staff 6.0 85 square inch head racquet. Federer switched to a bigger custom-built Wilson 90 square inch head racquet in 2003.

 His grip size was ​4 3⁄8 inches (L3).
 When asked about string tensions, Federer stated "this depends on how warm the days are and with what kind of balls I play and against who I play. So you can see – it depends on several factors and not just the surface; the feeling I have is most important."

Apparel

Federer first signed with Nike footwear and apparel in 1994.
 For the 2006 championships at Wimbledon, Nike designed a jacket emblazoned with a crest of three tennis racquets, symbolising the three Wimbledon Championships Federer had previously won, and which was updated the next year with four racquets after Federer won the Championship in 2006.
 At Wimbledon 2008, and again in 2009, Nike continued this trend by making him a personalised cardigan that also had his own logo, an R and an F joined together,

 which was originally designed by his wife, Mirka.


Federer's contract with Nike expired in March 2018, and Federer later signed a deal with Uniqlo.
 It was reported that Uniqlo signed Federer for roughly $300 million for 10 years ($30 million per year), as opposed to Nike's previous deal with Federer, which was for roughly $10 million per year.
 However, Federer does not have a shoe deal and chooses to wear Nike trainers.

Endorsements

Federer is one of the highest-earning athletes in the world. As of June 2019, Federer is listed at #5 on the Forbes "World's Highest Paid Athletes" list.
 Federer is endorsed by Japanese clothing company Uniqlo
 and Swiss companies Nationale Suisse, Credit Suisse, Rolex, Lindt, Sunrise, and Jura Elektroapparate.
 In 2010, his endorsement by Mercedes-Benz China was extended into a global partnership deal.
 His other sponsors include Gillette, Wilson, Barilla, and Moët & Chandon.


 Previously, Federer was an ambassador for Nike, NetJets, Emmi AG,
 and for Maurice Lacroix.

Career statistics
Main article: Roger Federer career statistics
Grand Slam tournament performance timeline
Key W 	 F  	SF 	QF 	#R 	RR 	Q# 	A 	NH
(W) Won; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (A) absent; (NH) not held. SR=strike rate (events won/competed)
To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended.

Current through the 2019 ATP Finals.
Tournament 	1999 	2000 	2001 	2002 	2003 	2004 	2005 	2006 	2007 	2008 	2009 	2010 	2011 	2012 	2013 	2014 	2015 	2016 	2017 	2018 	2019 	2020 	SR 	W–L 	Win %
Australian Open 	Q1 	3R 	3R 	4R 	4R 	W 	SF 	W 	W 	SF 	F 	W 	SF 	SF 	SF 	SF 	3R 	SF 	W 	W 	4R 		6 / 20 	97–14 	87%
French Open 	1R 	4R 	QF 	1R 	1R 	3R 	SF 	F 	F 	F 	W 	QF 	F 	SF 	QF 	4R 	QF 	A 	A 	A 	SF 		1 / 18 	70–17 	80%
Wimbledon 	1R 	1R 	QF 	1R 	W 	W 	W 	W 	W 	F 	W 	QF 	QF 	W 	2R 	F 	F 	SF 	W 	QF 	F 		8 / 21 	101–13 	89%
US Open 	Q2 	3R 	4R 	4R 	4R 	W 	W 	W 	W 	W 	F 	SF 	SF 	QF 	4R 	SF 	F 	A 	QF 	4R 	QF 		5 / 19 	89–14 	86%
Win–Loss 	0–2 	7–4 	13–4 	6–4 	13–3 	22–1 	24–2 	27–1 	26–1 	24–3 	26–2 	20–3 	20–4 	19–3 	13–4 	19–4 	18–4 	10–2 	18–1 	14–2 	18–4 		20 / 78 	357–58 	86%

Note: Federer received fourth-round walkovers at the US Open (2004 and 2012) and the Wimbledon Championships (2007), and a second-round walkover at the Australian Open (2012); these are not counted as wins
Grand Slam tournament finals: 31 (20 titles, 11 runner-ups)
Result 	Year 	Tournament 	Surface 	Opponent 	Score
Win 	2003 	Wimbledon 	Grass 	Australia Mark Philippoussis 	7–6(7–5), 6–2, 7–6(7–3)
Win 	2004 	Australian Open 	Hard 	Russia Marat Safin 	7–6(7–3), 6–4, 6–2
Win 	2004 	Wimbledon (2) 	Grass 	United States Andy Roddick 	4–6, 7–5, 7–6(7–3), 6–4
Win 	2004 	US Open 	Hard 	Australia Lleyton Hewitt 	6–0, 7–6(7–3), 6–0
Win 	2005 	Wimbledon (3) 	Grass 	United States Andy Roddick 	6–2, 7–6(7–2), 6–4
Win 	2005 	US Open (2) 	Hard 	United States Andre Agassi 	6–3, 2–6, 7–6(7–1), 6–1
Win 	2006 	Australian Open (2) 	Hard 	Cyprus Marcos Baghdatis 	5–7, 7–5, 6–0, 6–2
Loss 	2006 	French Open 	Clay 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	6–1, 1–6, 4–6, 6–7(4–7)
Win 	2006 	Wimbledon (4) 	Grass 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	6–0, 7–6(7–5), 6–7(2–7), 6–3
Win 	2006 	US Open (3) 	Hard 	United States Andy Roddick 	6–2, 4–6, 7–5, 6–1
Win 	2007 	Australian Open (3) 	Hard 	Chile Fernando González 	7–6(7–2), 6–4, 6–4
Loss 	2007 	French Open 	Clay 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	3–6, 6–4, 3–6, 4–6
Win 	2007 	Wimbledon (5) 	Grass 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	7–6(9–7), 4–6, 7–6(7–3), 2–6, 6–2
Win 	2007 	US Open (4) 	Hard 	Serbia Novak Djokovic 	7–6(7–4), 7–6(7–2), 6–4
Loss 	2008 	French Open 	Clay 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	1–6, 3–6, 0–6
Loss 	2008 	Wimbledon 	Grass 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	4–6, 4–6, 7–6(7–5), 7–6(10–8), 7–9
Win 	2008 	US Open (5) 	Hard 	United Kingdom Andy Murray 	6–2, 7–5, 6–2
Loss 	2009 	Australian Open 	Hard 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	5–7, 6–3, 6–7(3–7), 6–3, 2–6
Win 	2009 	French Open 	Clay 	Sweden Robin Söderling 	6–1, 7–6(7–1), 6–4
Win 	2009 	Wimbledon (6) 	Grass 	United States Andy Roddick 	5–7, 7–6(8–6), 7–6(7–5), 3–6, 16–14
Loss 	2009 	US Open 	Hard 	Argentina Juan Martín del Potro 	6–3, 6–7(5–7), 6–4, 6–7(4–7), 2–6
Win 	2010 	Australian Open (4) 	Hard 	United Kingdom Andy Murray 	6–3, 6–4, 7–6(13–11)
Loss 	2011 	French Open 	Clay 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	5–7, 6–7(3–7), 7–5, 1–6
Win 	2012 	Wimbledon (7) 	Grass 	United Kingdom Andy Murray 	4–6, 7–5, 6–3, 6–4
Loss 	2014 	Wimbledon 	Grass 	Serbia Novak Djokovic 	7–6(9–7), 4–6, 6–7(4–7), 7–5, 4–6
Loss 	2015 	Wimbledon 	Grass 	Serbia Novak Djokovic 	6–7(1–7), 7–6(12–10), 4–6, 3–6
Loss 	2015 	US Open 	Hard 	Serbia Novak Djokovic 	4–6, 7–5, 4–6, 4–6
Win 	2017 	Australian Open (5) 	Hard 	Spain Rafael Nadal 	6–4, 3–6, 6–1, 3–6, 6–3
Win 	2017 	Wimbledon (8) 	Grass 	Croatia Marin Čilić 	6–3, 6–1, 6–4
Win 	2018 	Australian Open (6) 	Hard 	Croatia Marin Čilić 	6–2, 6–7(5–7), 6–3, 3–6, 6–1
Loss 	2019 	Wimbledon 	Grass 	Serbia Novak Djokovic 	6–7(5–7), 6–1, 6–7(4–7), 6–4, 12–13(3–7)
Records
Main article: List of career achievements by Roger Federer
All-time tournament records
Tournament 	Since 	Record accomplished 	Players matched 	Refs
Grand Slam 	1877 	20 men's singles titles overall 	Stands alone 	

3 seasons with 3 men's singles titles (2004, 2006–07) 	
2 consecutive seasons with 3 men's singles titles (2006–07) 	
6 seasons with 2+ men's singles titles (2004–07, 2009, 2017) 	
4 consecutive seasons with 2+ men's singles titles (2004–07) 	
5 consecutive titles in 2 different tournaments (2003–2007 Wimbledon, 2004–2008 US Open) 	

10 titles defended overall 	
All 4 Grand Slam finals reached in three seasons (2006–2007, 2009) 	
31 men's singles finals overall 	

45 men's singles semifinals overall 	


56 men's singles quarterfinals overall 	


78 men's singles tournament appearances overall 	
10 consecutive men's singles finals 	

23 consecutive semifinals 	


36 consecutive quarterfinals 	

357 match wins overall 	


100+ matches won at a single tournament (Wimbledon) 	
40 consecutive match wins at 2 different tournaments (Wimbledon, US Open) 	
415 matches played 	
11 hard court titles 	
8+ titles on two different surfaces (hard & grass) 	
12+ finals on two different surfaces (hard & grass) 	
186 hard court match wins overall 	
6+ titles at 2 different tournaments (Australian Open, Wimbledon) 	
5+ titles at 3 different tournaments (Australian Open, Wimbledon, US Open) 	
7+ finals at 3 different tournaments (Australian Open, Wimbledon, US Open) 	
5+ finals at all 4 different tournaments 	Rafael Nadal 	
12 finals at a single tournament (Wimbledon) 	
4+ consecutive finals at 3 different tournaments (French Open, Wimbledon, US Open) 	Stands alone 	
6+ consecutive finals at 2 different tournaments (Wimbledon, US Open) 	
13+ semifinals at 2 different tournaments (Australian Open, Wimbledon) 	
10+ semifinals at 3 different tournaments (Australian Open, Wimbledon, US Open) 	
8+ semifinals at all 4 different tournaments 	
12+ quarterfinals at all 4 different tournaments 	
Guinness World Records

As of 2019 Federer holds the third highest number of Guinness World Records within one discipline, a total of 30, which include 18 performance based records.

Open Era records

    These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis.
    Records in bold indicate peerless achievements.
    Records in italics are active streaks.

Time span 	Selected Grand Slam tournament records 	Players matched 	Refs
Grand Slam tournaments 	Time Span 	Records at each Grand Slam tournament 	Players matched 	Refs
Time span 	Other selected records 	Players matched
See also

    iconTennis portal Biography portal flagSwitzerland portal

icon 	

    Book: Roger Federer

    Roger Federer career statistics
    List of career achievements by Roger Federer
    List of Grand Slam men's singles champions
    All-time tennis records – men's singles
    Open Era tennis records – men's singles (since 1968)
    ATP World Tour records (since 1990)
    ATP World Tour Awards
    List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players (since 1973)
    World number 1 ranked male tennis players (all time, based on recognized tennis authorities)
    2004 Summer Olympics national flag bearers
    2008 Summer Olympics national flag bearers

Notes

See:













 See also: 100 Greatest of All Time.
The existing Major champions Federer defeated were Marat Safin (2004 Australian Open), Andy Roddick (2004, 2005 & 2009 Wimbledon and 2006 US Open), Lleyton Hewitt (2004 US Open), Andre Agassi (2005 US Open), Rafael Nadal (2006 & 2007 Wimbledon and 2017 Australian Open) and Marin Čilić (2017 Wimbledon and 2018 Australian Open).

    Known as "Tennis Masters Cup" (2000–2008), "ATP World Tour Finals" (2009–2016) and "ATP Finals" (2017–present).

References

"Player profile – Roger Federer". ATP World Tour.
"Rankings | Singles | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour.
"Rankings: Singles". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
David Foster Wallace (20 August 2006). "Roger Federer as Religious Experience". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 February 2018.
"Credit Suisse – Roger Federer, a Basel Boy Forever". Sponsorship.credit-suisse.com. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
Dwyre, Bill (12 March 2009). "Roger Federer wants to show Federer can go from two to one". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 11 August 2013.
Briggs, Simon (13 May 2014). "Roger Federer: Birth of twins makes this time of my life". The Daily Telegraph.
Für wen schlägt Federers Fussball-Herz? Archived 14 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Blick, 11 September 2009
Stauffer, René (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Quest for Perfection. New Chapter Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-942257-39-7.
"Ask Roger — Official website". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 25 February 2007. Retrieved 2 March 2007.
Federer, Roger. "Ask Roger". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 6 March 2009. Retrieved 30 June 2009.
"Blast From The Past: Roger Federer as Ball Boy at Swiss Indoors". Tennis World USA.
Muhieddine, Fabian (13 July 2009). "Roger Federer: le voici exempté de PC..." Le Matin (in French). Archived from the original on 18 October 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2009.
"Federer to serve in Swiss civil force, not army". USA Today. 6 February 2004. Retrieved 25 March 2016.
"Roger Federer – Celebrity fans – Interviews". FourFourTwo. 31 July 2009. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
Lin, Thomas (29 May 2009). "How Badminton Helped Federer's Game". Straight Sets. Retrieved 29 July 2011.
Viner, Brian (2 July 2005). "Roger Federer: A Smashing Guy". The Independent. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
"Off Court — Mr. and Mrs. Federer". Roger Federer Official Website. 11 April 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2009.
"Roger Federer and wife are proud parents of twins". OneIndia. 24 July 2009. Retrieved 3 October 2009.
"Roger Federer's wife gives birth to second set of twins". BBC Sport. 6 May 2014. Retrieved 6 May 2014.
"Roger Federer: Mirka and I couldn't be happier with twin boys – and now we know how to cope with babies on tour". The Guardian. 13 May 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2014.
"Boys' Singles Finals 1947–2011". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014.
"Boys' Doubles Finals 1947–2011". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014.
ITF Junior. "Federer Junior Activity". Retrieved 29 December 2014.
"Roger Federer – 2000 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Hingis, Federer win Hopman Cup title over U.S." Sports Illustrated. 6 January 2001. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2012.
Daniel, Owen (7 January 2001). "Hopman Cup: Hingis ends jinx". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 12 July 2012.
"Federer beats Boutter in Milan for first title". Hürriyet Daily News. 6 February 2001.
"Roger Federer, Belinda Bencic claim the Hopman Cup for Switzerland with victory over Germany". Perth Now. 6 January 2018.
"Roger Federer – 2001 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
Roberts, Selena (3 July 2001). "Sampras, King of Wimbledon, Is Dethroned". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 November 2017.
"Roger Federer – 2002 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Roger Federer – 1998 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Roger Federer – 1999 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Roger Federer – 2003 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
ATP. "Roger Federer 2003 Doubles". Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2010.
"Roger Federer – 2004 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Roger Federer – 2005 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 9 July 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Federer suffers ligament injury". BBC Sport. 13 October 2005.
Tignor, Steve (28 November 2011). "Final thoughts". Tennis.com.
"Roger Federer – 2006 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Federer defeats Gonzalez for 10th Grand Slam title". ESPN. 28 January 2007. Retrieved 13 April 2017.
DeSimone, Bonnie (5 April 2007). "Canas keeps the ball in court in doping case". ESPN.
"Rafael Nadal VS. Roger Federer – Paris 2007". ATP World Tour.
Tennis-X.com. "Darth Federer Eyes 12th Slam Today Against Djokovic". tennis-x.com. Retrieved 22 May 2017.
"Australian Open Men's Singles Champions". Australian Open. Archived from the original on 15 January 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"Roland Garros Men's Singles Past Winners 1891–2011". Roland Garros. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2012.
"Wimbledon Men's Singles Finals". Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"US Open Men's Singles Finals". US Open. Archived from the original on 22 February 2009. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"Federer battles off-court foe – mononucleosis". The New York Times. 7 March 2008. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
"Roger Federer – 2008 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Federer and Wawrinka golden together". Retrieved 16 August 2008.
ATP. "Roger Federer 2008 Doubles". Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2010.
Bierley, Steve (1 February 2009). "Nadal wins battle for place in history by edging past Federer in Melbourne". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 February 2009.
"Roger Federer – Player Activity". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 25 April 2017.
Clarey, Christopher (7 June 2009). "The Greatest? Federer's Victory Fills Last Hole on His Résumé". The New York Times. Paris. Retrieved 26 February 2017.
penabaza (21 December 2011). "Roger Federer – Tweener – US Open 2009 [HD]" – via YouTube.
"Roger Federer – 2010 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 30 January 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2014.
"Tennis – ATP World Tour – Roland Garros Friday – Federer Joins 700 Match Wins Club". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
Buddell, James. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – The Championships – Berdych Sends Federer Spinning Out". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
"Federer joins an elite club – Rediff Sports". Rediff.com. 21 June 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
"Roger Federer hires Paul Annacone as coach to help revive career". The Guardian. 26 July 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2013.
"Federer back to winning ways with fourth Cincinnati crown". ATP. 22 August 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2010.
Briggs, Simon (27 January 2011). "Australian Open 2011: Roger Federer did not just lose against Novak Djokovic; Federer was at a loss". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 27 January 2011.
Briggs, Simon (10 September 2011). "US Open 2011: semi-final fightback by Novak Djokovic ends Roger Federer's title hopes in epic encounter". The Daily Telegraph.
"Federer, Mandela are world's most respected & trusted". ATP World Tour. 19 September 2011.
"Mandela pips Federer". Times LIVE South Africa. 21 September 2011.
Buddell, James. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Barclays ATP World Tour Finals 2011 Final – Federer Wins Record Sixth Title". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
"Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in straight sets to secure a meeting with Rafael Nadal in Sunday's French Open final". 8 June 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2012.[dead link]
"French Open: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer to reach final". BBC Sport. 8 June 2012. Retrieved 1 July 2019.
Dupont, Kevin Paul (9 July 2012). "Roger Federer wins 7th Wimbledon title". The Boston Globe.
Rossingh, Danielle (8 July 2012). "wimb2012". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013.
"Roger Federer wins 7th Wimbledon, tying Pete Sampras". WJLA.com. Associated Press. 8 July 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012.
Fendrich, Howard (8 July 2012). "Federer beats Murray for 7th Wimbledon, 17th major". Yahoo! Sports. Associated Press. Retrieved 5 December 2014.
Mitchell, Kevin (3 August 2012). "Roger Federer beats Juan Martín del Potro to reach Olympic final". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 January 2013.
Killion, Ann (5 August 2012). "Despite loss to Murray, silver medal meaningful for Federer in London". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 9 January 2013.
"Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to win Cincinnati Open". BBC Sport. 19 August 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2012.
"Roger Federer loses to Tomas Berdych in US Open quarters". BBC Sport. 6 September 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012.
"Djokovic beats Federer to win World Tour Finals title". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 November 2012.
"Rafael Nadal powers to win over Roger Federer at Indian Wells". BBC Sport. 15 March 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
"Roger Federer Ties John McEnroe With 77th Career Title In Halle". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
"Roger Federer loses at Wimbledon, snapping greatest streak in tennis". USA Today.
"Roger Federer's ranking history". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 6 July 2013.
Cronin, Matt (16 July 2013). "Federer playing with new, larger racquet in Hamburg". Tennis.com.
Cronin, Matt (27 December 2013). "Federer to play with larger racquet in 2014". Tennis.com.
Newman, Paul (13 October 2013). "The fading Roger Federer puts coach Paul Annacone out to grass". The Independent. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
"Federer reflects on mistakes of playing injured". Tennis.com. 20 October 2013.
rogerfederer.com
Bishop, Greg (16 January 2014). "Seeking Bigger Sweet Spot, Roger Federer Hopes His Racket Will Grow on Him". The New York Times.
"Roger Federer fights back to beat Tomas Berdych in Dubai". BBC Sport. 1 March 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
Rothenberg, Ben (29 August 2014). "Council Replaces President in Election That's More Than a Popularity Contest". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 December 2014.
Oddo, Chris (22 June 2014). "Roger Federer Stepping Down as President of ATP Player Council". TennisNow.com. Retrieved 9 December 2014.
"Federer celebrated for ATP Player Council contribution". ATP World Tour. 21 June 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2014.
"Switzerland 3:2 Italy". Davis Cup. Retrieved 17 September 2014.
"Roger Federer, Switzerland win first Davis Cup title". USA Today. 23 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014.
"Davis Cup final attracts record crowd". Reuters. 21 November 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2017.
Sharko, Greg (11 January 2015). "By the numbers: Federer's 1000 match wins". Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP).
"Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to win Dubai title". BBC Sport. 28 February 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015.
"Federer Surpasses 9,000 Aces Mark, Re-live Matches With Most Aces". Retrieved 28 February 2015.
"Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in Indian Wells final". BBC Sport. 22 March 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2015.
"Djokovic Wins Fourth Rome Crown; Fourth Masters 1000 Title Of 2015". Retrieved 3 June 2015.
Briggs, Simon (2 June 2015). "French Open 2015: Stan Wawrinka's evisceration of Roger Federer was bold in intent and brutal in execution". The Daily Telegraph.
"Roger Federer beats Andreas Seppi to claim record eighth title at Gerry Weber Open". ESPN. 21 June 2015.
Newbery, Piers (12 July 2015). "Wimbledon 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 17 July 2015.
"Roger Federer wins seventh Cincinnati Masters title". BBC Sport. 23 August 2015. Retrieved 24 August 2015.
Mitchell, Kevin (12 September 2015). "US Open 2015: Roger Federer swats aside Stan Wawrinka to reach final". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 September 2015.
Newbery, Piers (14 September 2015). "US Open 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 September 2015.
"Federer Denies Nadal For Seventh Basel Crown | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour.
"Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal to win Swiss Indoors title". BBC Sport. 1 November 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015.
"Federer To Begin 2016 With New-Look Team | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour.
"Brisbane International: Milos Raonic beats Roger Federer". BBC Sport. 10 January 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016.
"Australian Open 2016: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer". BBC Sport. 28 January 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016.
"Roger Federer faces a month on sidelines after knee surgery". The Guardian. 3 February 2016. Retrieved 3 February 2016.
"Roger Federer pulls out of comeback match at Miami Open". BBC Sport. 25 March 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016.
"Roger Federer: Former world number one withdraws from French Open". BBC Sport. 19 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016.
Garber, Greg (6 July 2016). "The comeback king: Roger Federer still has the capacity to surprise". ESPN. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
Newbery, Piers (8 July 2016). "Wimbledon 2016: Milos Raonic beats Roger Federer to reach first Grand Slam final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
"Roger Federer to miss Rio 2016 Olympics and rest of season with knee injury". BBC Sport. 26 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016.
ET, 2016 at 2:02p (27 July 2016). "Is this the end for Roger Federer?". FOX Sports.
Eccleshare, Charlie (3 May 2016). "Why Roger Federer will never win another grand slam". The Daily Telegraph.
"Roger Federer's schedule for 2017". December 2016.
Gleeson, Michael (22 January 2017). "Australian Open 2017: Roger Federer beats Kei Nishikori in enthralling five-set battle". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
"Australian Open: Roger Federer outlasts Stan Wawrinka in five sets to make Melbourne Park final". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 26 January 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
"Roger Federer beats Stan Wawrinka to reach Australian Open final". BBC Sport. 26 January 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
"Federer Tops Nadal In Epic For 18th Major Crown". ATP World Tour. 30 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017.
"Australian Open: Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal to win 18th Grand Slam title". BBC Sport. 30 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017.
Trollope, Matt (30 January 2017). "Federer's high five". ausopen.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017.
"Federer reassesses goals after Indian Wells triumph". ATP World Tour. 20 March 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2017.
"Federer Completes Third Sunshine Double With Miami Title". ATP World Tour. 2 April 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2017.
"Roger Federer will skip French Open, eyes grass-court season". ESPN. Associated Press. 15 May 2017. Retrieved 15 May 2017.
"Roger Federer stunned by Tommy Haas in first game back". Eurosport. 14 June 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017.
"Roger Federer warms up for Wimbledon with 92nd career title". ESPN. Associated Press. 25 June 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2017.
"How the 2017 Wimbledon Final Was Won". ATP World Tour. 17 July 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017.
Streeter, Kurt (17 July 2017). "Somehow, Roger Federer keeps pushing the boundaries of greatness". ESPN. Retrieved 17 July 2017.
"Federer Claims Historic Eighth Wimbledon Title". ATP World Tour. 17 July 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017.
"Federer To Make Record 15th Appearance At Nitto ATP Finals | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour.
"Team Europe wins Laver Cup after epic Federer victory – Laver Cup". 24 September 2017.
"Federer wins Shanghai Masters with straight sets victory over Nadal". enca.com.
"Swiss precision lands third Hopman Cup title – Hopman Cup". Hopman Cup. 6 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018.
"Roger Federer wins sixth Australian Open and 20th Grand Slam title". BBC Sport. 28 January 2018. Retrieved 4 February 2018.
"Roger Federer, 36, to become oldest No. 1 ever in ATP rankings". ESPN. 16 February 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
"Roger Federer wins Rotterdam Open two days after becoming world No 1". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
"Federer Outlasts Coric, Completes Best Start To A Season | ATP World Tour | Tennis". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 17 March 2018.
"Miami Open: Roger Federer to lose top spot and miss French Open after defeat". BBC Sport. 25 March 2018.
"Rafael Nadal will lose his world No. 1 ranking to Roger Federer". 11 May 2018. Retrieved 11 May 2018.
"Roger Federer beats Nick Kyrgios to reclaim world No. 1 spot, as Ash Barty wins through to Nottingham final". ABC. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018.
"Roger Federer beats Milos Raonic to win Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2018.
"Borna Coric defeats Roger Federer in absorbing Gerry Weber Open final in Halle". Sky Sports. Retrieved 24 June 2018.
"Roger Federer crashes out of Wimbledon in five-set thriller as Kevin Anderson completes miraculous comeback". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 11 July 2018.
"Roger Federer out of Wimbledon as Kevin Anderson fights back from two sets down". BBC Sport. 11 July 2018. Retrieved 11 July 2018.
"Djokovic clinches career golden Masters". Sport24. 20 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
Barry, Jamie (4 September 2018). "Australia's John Millman victorious against Roger Federer at US Open". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 4 September 2018.
"Laver Cup 2018 results: Team Europe WIN – Roger Federer and Zverev seal Chicago glory". Express. 24 September 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018.
"Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic beaten in Laver Cup doubles". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 14 October 2018.
"Shanghai Masters: Roger Federer beaten but Novak Djokovic into final against Borna Coric". BBC Sport. 13 October 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018.
"Roger Federer reveals struggle with hand injury ahead of Swiss Open". www.sportingnews.com.
McKenzie, Mikael (21 October 2018). "Roger Federer injury: Star makes surprising confession at Swiss Indoors". Express.co.uk.
"Roger Federer wins Swiss Indoors to claim 99th career ATP title". ESPN. 28 October 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2018.
"Hopman Cup: Roger Federer & Belinda Bencic retain title for Switzerland". BBC Sport. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019.
"Roger Federer plans to play clay-court season after Australian Open exit". BBC Sport. 20 January 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019.
"Roger Federer beaten by Stefanos Tsitsipas in Australian Open fourth round". BBC Sport. 20 January 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2019.
"Roger Federer wins 100th ATP title in Dubai with victory over Stefanos Tsitsipas". BBC Sport. 2 March 2019. Retrieved 3 March 2019.
"Dominic Thiem upsets Roger Federer at Indian Wells for first Masters title". The Guardian. Associated Press. 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019.
"Roger Federer beats hobbled John Isner at Miami Open for 101st career title". The Guardian. Associated Press. 31 March 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2019.
"Roger Federer squanders two match points in Madrid Open defeat to Dominic Thiem". The Daily Telegraph. 10 May 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2019.
"Roger Federer Withdraws From Rome QF". ATP Tour. Retrieved 23 May 2019.
"Roger Federer to face Rafael Nadal in French Open semi-finals". BBC Sport. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2019.
"Federer Win 10th Halle Title, Sends Wimbledon Warning". ATP Tour. Retrieved 23 June 2019.
Mitchell, Kevin (12 July 2019). "Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal in four sets to reach Wimbledon men's final". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
"Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in Wimbledon final-set tie-break thriller". BBC Sport. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
"Roger Federer suffers his fastest defeat in 16 years at the Cincinnati Masters". CNN. CNN. Retrieved 16 August 2019.
"Roger Federer dumped out of US Open after five-set defeat to Grigor Dimitrov". The Telegraph. The Telegraph. Retrieved 10 September 2019.
"Roger Federer shares why Federer still plays professional tennis". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 4 October 2019.
"Federer Fights Off Goffin, Into Shanghai Quarterfinals". Tennis Now. Retrieved 10 October 2019.
"Federer handed point penalty in surprise defeat to Zverev at the Shanghai Masters". Live Tennis. Retrieved 11 October 2019.
"Roger Federer claims 10th Basel crown with victory over Alex de Minaur". ESPN. 28 October 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019.
"Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic at 2019 ATP Finals in London". BBC Sport. BBC Sport. Retrieved 17 November 2019.
"Stefanos Tsitsipas beats Roger Federer & faces Dominic Thiem for title at ATP Finals". BBC Sport. BBC Sport. Retrieved 17 November 2019.
Mitchell, Kevin (20 November 2014). "Roger Federer's back problem leaves Davis Cup final on knife edge". The Guardian.
"Davis Cup – Teams". daviscup.com.
"Roger Federer VS Rafael Nadal". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Rafa & Roger: The Rivalry". ATP World Tour. 29 January 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Fendrich, Howard (7 July 2008). "Federer-Nadal rivalry as good as it gets". ESPN. Associated Press.
Weaver, Paul (7 July 2008). "Move over McEnroe and Borg, this one will run and run in the memory". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Flanagan, Martin (12 July 2008). "Federer v Nadal as good as sport gets". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Bodo, Peter (30 January 2009). "Rivalry!". Peter Bodo's Tennisworld. Tennis.com. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
MacGregor, Jeff (3 February 2009). "Greatest rivalry of the 21st century?". ESPN. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Jago, Richard (15 August 2009). "Andy Murray reaches world No2 rank after beating Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 August 2010.
"It's official: Nadal will pass Federer for No. 1". NBC Sports (Associated Press). 1 August 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Jenkins, Bruce (7 July 2008). "The Greatest Match Ever". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Alleyne, Richard (7 July 2008). "Wimbledon 2008: John McEnroe hails Rafael Nadal victory as greatest final ever". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Wertheim, Jon (9 July 2008). "Without a doubt, it's the greatest". Tennis Mailbag. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
Tignor, Steve (8 July 2008). "W: Report Cards". Concrete Elbow. Tennis.com. Retrieved 14 February 2009.
"Roger Federer VS Novak Djokovic". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Novak & Roger: The Rivalry". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 24 April 2013.
"Djokovic Snatches Monumental Victory from Federer". Tennis Now. Retrieved 14 September 2011.
"Wimbledon 2012: Roger Federer keeps his dream of equalling Sampras' record alive". The Times of India. 7 July 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2012.
"Novak Djokovic Defeats Roger Federer for Wimbledon Title". The New York Times. 6 July 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2014.
"Wimbledon 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. 12 July 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2016.
"Novak Djokovic Defeats Roger Federer to Win U.S. Open". The New York Times. 13 September 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2016.
"Roger Federer vs. Novak Djokovic: The Best Hard Court Rivalry". Bleacher Report. 28 August 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2012.
"Roger Federer VS Andy Murray". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Superb Federer ends Murray dream". BBC Sport. 8 September 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
"Andy Murray falls to brilliant Roger Federer in Australian Open final". The Guardian. 31 January 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2014.
Bierley, Steve (14 November 2008). "Murray beats Federer in 3 sets". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
Ornstein, David (23 November 2010). "Roger Federer crushes lacklustre Andy Murray in London". BBC Sport.
"Roger Federer VS Andy Roddick". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"WTA big three one step away from a major rivalry". ESPN. 9 October 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2015.
"Roger Federer VS Lleyton Hewitt". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Wimbledon: Lleyton Hewitt praised by Roger Federer ahead of SW19 finale". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 27 June 2015. Retrieved 8 July 2016.
"Roger Federer VS David Nalbandian". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Roger Federer VS Marat Safin". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
Hodgkinson, Mark (1 February 2005). "New rivalry has echoes of a golden era". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
"Roger Federer VS Andre Agassi". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Roger Federer VS Stan Wawrinka". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 22 September 2016.
"Federer, Wawrinka temporarily set aside camaraderie". ESPN. Retrieved 22 September 2016.
"Federer / Wawrinka Doubles team's record". Tennis Explorer. Retrieved 25 January 2017.
"Roger Federer VS Juan Martin Del Potro". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 19 March 2018.
"Del Potro Saves 3 M.P. v. Federer For Maiden Masters 1000 Title". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 18 March 2018.
"Roger Federer VS Tomas Berdych". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
Ornstein, David (30 June 2010). "Wimbledon 2010: Roger Federer stunned by Tomas Berdych". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 September 2016.
"Roger Federer VS Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018.
"Roger Federer VS Marin Cilic". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 26 January 2018.
Flory, Kate. "Wimbledon Final – Federer Makes History With 15th Grand Slam Title – Tennis". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
"Roger Federer's Grand Slam Titles". CNN.
Alexander, Paul (9 February 2008). "Federer's streak of 10 straight Grand Slam finals ended by Djokovic". Coastal Courier. Retrieved 27 June 2019.
Harwitt, Sandra (26 January 2018). "Roger Federer reaches Australian Open final, his 30th Grand Slam singles finals appearance". USA Today. Retrieved 27 June 2019.
"Roger FEDERER – Olympic Tennis | Switzerland". International Olympic Committee. 19 July 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017.
"Rankings history". ATP Tour. 11 October 2015.
"Federer, Del Potro, Bryans Honoured In 2016 ATP World Tour Awards". ATP Tour. 10 November 2016.
"Winners Archive Roger Federer". Laureus World Sports Awards. Retrieved 10 July 2009.
"Getting the lowdown on a living tennis legend". Retrieved 3 July 2018.
"Roger Federer makes the short list of truly legendary athletes". Retrieved 3 July 2018.
"Federer named greatest player by Tennis Channel". Fox Sports. 23 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
"Australian tennis great Rod Laver says Roger Federer is the greatest player of all time". The Advertiser (Adelaide). 5 July 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
Evans, Richard (24 June 2007). "Jack the Lad". The Observer. Retrieved 15 February 2009. "Jack Kramer 'is ready to anoint Roger Federer as the best Federer has seen'."
"Federer the greatest ever – Lloyd". BBC Sport. 7 June 2009. Retrieved 7 June 2009.
Jago, Richard (5 June 2009). "'Roger Federer is the greatest' says Pete Sampras after record broken". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2010.
Barnes, Simon (8 June 2009). "Roger Federer, greatest of all time, ensures statistics back up unrivalled artistry". The Times. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
"Top 10 Men's Tennis Players of All Time". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
Federer the best of all time, says Agassi. The Age. Retrieved 20 July 2012
"Federer cemented himself as greatest of all time". ESPN. 30 January 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017.
Federer greatest of all time, says Laver". tennis.com/au. Retrieved 20 July 2012
"Borg: Federer a True Artist". NOS. 9 July 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012.
"Tennis' top 20 of all time". ESPN. 23 June 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2017.
"Hewitt: Federer is the greatest tennis player of all time". The New Paper. 19 March 2015. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
"Federer 'is the greatest ever tennis player'". CNN. 9 July 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2017.
"Roger Federer is the greatest athlete of his generation". USA Today. 28 January 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2018.
"Forget tennis: Federer now the greatest athlete of them all". ABC News. 17 July 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2018.
Tignor, Steve (2 March 2018). "The 50 greatest players of the Open Era (m): No. 1, Roger Federer". Tennis.com.
"Federer Honoured With Three Awards". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 3 February 2018.
"Roger Federer – Player Activity – ATP World Tour – Tennis". ATP World Tour.
https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/c4/5d/49/c45d49278a524d6a107a00c354bb05c0.jpg
"Search Results". sicovers.com.
"Why FedEx won't tie Pete Sampras' Wimbledon record". Bleacher Report. 23 June 2012. Retrieved 21 October 2019.
"The first airplane with RF Brand". 19 December 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2019.
"Federer Express Cruises To 16th Grand Slam Title, Tops Murray in Australia". All Headline News. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2010.
"Five of the Swiss Maestro's greatest triumphs". Bein Sports. 2 March 2019. Retrieved 21 October 2019.
"What the Swiss Maestro can teach us". Medium.com. 24 October 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2019.
"King Roger". The Times. 29 January 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2019.
"Roger Federer Foundation To Support Children And Young People in South Africa". Roger Federer Official Website. 28 May 2004. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 5 January 2015.
"Roger Federer Foundation Mission". Roger Federer Foundation. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2012.
Roopanarine, Les (30 November 2012). "Roger Federer Foundation aiming for maximum impact with minimum spin". The Guardian.
"Foundation – Roger Federer Foundation To Support Children And Young People In South Africa" (Press release). Roger Federer Foundation. 28 May 2004. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
"Solid foundation improves children's lives". swissinfo.ch. 11 June 2009. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
Stauffer, Rene (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Question for Perfection. New Chapter Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0942257397. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
"Off Court – Racquets Net $40,000 For Victims of Hurricane". Roger Federer Official Website. 20 September 2005. Archived from the original on 24 October 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"Federer visits tsunami victims in India". SwissInfo. 23 December 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
"UNICEF's newest Goodwill Ambassador, tennis star Roger Federer, hits an ace for children". UNICEF. 3 April 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
Koch, David (26 November 2007). "Roger Federer to speak out on World AIDS Day". UNICEF.
"Roger Federer leads Haiti earthquake fundraiser in Melbourne". The Guardian. 17 January 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
Gecker, Jocelyn (18 January 2010). "Tennis stars revel in 'Hit for Haiti' fundraiser". Stuff.co.nz. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
"Hit for Haiti Raises $1 Million on a Night to Remember". ATP World Tour. 12 March 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
"Tennis stars rally for relief". Tennis Australia. 13 January 2011.
Quayle, Emma (17 January 2011). "Tennis aces serve it up for the flood victims". The Sydney Morning Herald.
"Roger Federer honoured by his home university". 24 November 2017.
sportsfeelgoodstories.com (20 February 2009). "Roger Federer, a class act on and off the court, leads tennis revival". Retrieved 16 February 2010.
https://www.tennisfrontier.com/news/atp-tennis/facing-federer-dominik-hrbatys-take/
Saiyid, Aamna. "Hall of Fame: Roger Federer – the Swiss Maestro". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 16 April 2014.
"Roger or Rafa: Clash of the Wimbledon sex symbols". The Independent. 5 July 2008. Retrieved 23 November 2014.
Australianopen.com. "Match Statistics: Federer vs. Murray". Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 16 February 2010.
Wimbledon.org. "Match Statistics:Federer vs. Roddick". Archived from the original on 12 June 2010. Retrieved 16 February 2010.
Ubha, Ravi (2 July 2008). "Federer's serve allowing him to manufacture easy points". ESPN. Retrieved 16 February 2010.
Bierley, Stephen (8 July 2003). "Serve-volley dead? No one told Federer". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
"Best Serve and Volleyer in the World". Essential Tennis. 11 July 2010. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2010.
Tandon, Kamakshi (25 June 2014). "Federer looks for 'that little extra' with return to serve-and-volley roots". Tennis.com.
Naderi, Nima (30 September 2009). "The Tale of Two Tweeners: Federer vs. Llodra". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on 7 December 2011.
Tignor, Steve (3 December 2014). "No. 8: The Roger Resurgence". Tennis.com.
Bodo, Peter (17 August 2014). "The Reliables". Tennis.com.
"The SABR: Federer's new bravado". USOpen.org.
Tandon, Kamashi (16 March 2017). "Roger Federer Credits Switch To Bigger Racquet For Improved Backhand". Tennis.com. Retrieved 25 June 2019.
Peele, Stanton (28 August 2016). "Why Roger Federer is Great". psychologytoday.com.
Waldstein, David (28 August 2016). "Cool Federer Image Was Forged in a Hot Head". The New York Times.
"Roger Federer: 'I do not know if I will be playing in three or five years'". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 9 October 2019.
Cohn, Patrick (28 August 2016). "Federer's Mental Toughness and Maturity". sportspsychologytennis.com.
"Roger Federer's Tennis Racquet". tennis nerd. 26 January 2018.
"Roger Federer locker room interview with Anabelle Croft – O2 Finals 2017" – via YouTube.
"Wilson Sports". Wilson Sporting Goods. Archived from the original on 22 January 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2010.
Necwomb, Tim (15 October 2014). "Designing with Federer: How a superstar shapes his signature gear". Sports Illustrated.
"Ask Roger — Equipment". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 25 July 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2010.
"Ask Roger; Official website". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 2 March 2007.
"Roger Federer Sponsors". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2012.
Hodgkinson, Mark (27 June 2006). "More than a jacket for Federer". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 14 June 2009.
Hodgkinson, Mark (27 June 2006). "More jacket than racket for Federer". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 5 September 2007.
Bruback, Holly (29 August 2009). "The Main Characters of Tennis, and Style". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 February 2011.
Brubach, Holly. "RF: Tennis's Main Characters". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 June 2018.
"Roger Federer drops decades-old Nike partnership for Uniqlo". BBC News. 2 July 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2018.
Binlot, Ann (28 August 2018). "Roger Federer On Why Federer Ditched Nike For A $300 Million Uniqlo Deal". Forbes. Retrieved 7 January 2019.
"Roger Federer reveals RF logo and shoes situation after ditching Nike for Uniqlo". Metro. 2 July 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2019.
"#5 Roger Federer". Forbes. 10 June 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019.
"Federer Grinding It Out". Tennis.com. 20 May 2009. Retrieved 10 September 2014.
"Mercedes-Benz Announces Global Partnership with Roger Federer" (Press release). Mercedes-Benz USA. 27 May 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2011.
Soshnick, Scott; Rossingh, Danielle (1 June 2012). "Roger Federer, Agent Tony Godsick Leaving Management Company IMG". Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
"Roger Federer Moët & Chandon Ambassador". Moet.com. 2 January 2012. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2014.
"Top-Ranked Player Wants Top-Shelf Endorsements". The New York Times. Bloomberg News. 29 January 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2014.
"Roger Federer Chronometer". Europa Star. 2 April 2005. Retrieved 14 June 2009.
"Federer Wins Seventh Wimbledon Crown". ATP World Tour. 8 July 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2012.
Macpherson, Paul (12 January 2010). "Roger's Records To Stand Test of Time". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 12 February 2012.
Walton, Darren (9 July 2012). "Federer joins sporting all-time greats". Wide World of Sports. NineMSN. Australian Associated Press. Archived from the original on 16 December 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "In addition to his 17 titles from an unrivalled 24 grand slam finals..."
"Federer Cruises Past Youzhny Into 32nd Major Semi-Final". ATP World Tour. 4 July 2012. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
Gleeson, Michael (24 January 2013). "Federer taken to the brink by dogged Frenchman". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 24 January 2013.
"Federer tops Tsonga, setting up Aussie Open QF with Murray". Tennis.com. 20 January 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014.
"Vintage Federer Takes Out Tsonga". ATP World Tour. 20 January 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2014.
Tandon, Kamakshi (9 June 2009). "Federer's numbers speak volumes". ESPN. Retrieved 12 June 2012.
Lilley, Drew. "Wimbledon Legends – Roger Federer". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2012.
Ford, Bonnie D. (21 January 2013). "Federer, again, silences the young". ESPN. Retrieved 21 January 2013.
"Federer Moves Clear of Connors For Most Major Match Wins". ATP World Tour. 30 May 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2012.
Sharko, Greg (19 January 2013). "Shark Bites: Federer's 250 Major Match Wins". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 22 January 2013.
"Guinness Records online registry, requires signing in, lists higher number of records due to Federer being mentioned in the description of many records that don't belong to him". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 21 May 2018.
"Federer never doubted Paris win". BBC Sport. 7 June 2009. Retrieved 9 July 2012.
Clarey, Christopher (7 June 2009). "The Greatest? Federer's Victory Fills Last Hole on His Résumé". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 July 2012.
Tandon, Kamakshi (17 June 2011). "Nadal eyes another Channel Slam". ESPN. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
Sharp, Alex (29 June 2018). ""Channel Slam" For Rafa And Simona". Roland Garros. Retrieved 26 June 2019.
Garber, Greg (13 September 2004). "Federer unbeatable right now". ESPN. Retrieved 31 August 2012. "Federer also became the first man in the Open Era to win his first four Grand Slam finals."
Hinds, Richard (30 January 2006). "Federer takes new leap towards history". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 31 August 2012. "Federer's perfect record in seven grand slam finals."
Beasley, Bryan (29 January 2017). "The numbers behind Federer's 5th Australian Open title". ESPN. Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017.
Tandon, Kamakshi (24 December 2009). "What's your tennis IQ? – 2009 tennis holiday quiz". ESPN. Retrieved 18 June 2012. "[Nadal's] Australian Open title made him the first man to simultaneously hold majors on clay, grass and hard courts."
"Roger Federer Bio". Tennis Magazine. Retrieved 5 September 2012. "In 2006, Federer became the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to make all four Grand Slam finals in a calendar year, winning three of them; Federer repeated that feat in 2007. Federer also made all four finals in 2009, winning two."
"Federer Records 60th Win at Roland Garros; Raonic Powers Through". ATP World Tour. 28 May 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2014.
Garber, Greg (29 January 2017). "Roger Federer beats longtime rival Rafael Nadal, wins 18th Grand Slam". ESPN. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017.
Petkovski, Suzi (26 January 2012). "Top 10: Fed's feats and streaks". Australian Open. Archived from the original on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012.
Walsh, Courtney (24 January 2013). "Roger Federer forced to dig deep over five sets by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Australian Open". The Australian. Retrieved 24 January 2013. "[H]e threatened to end another of Federer's streaks...a tenth straight semi-final in Melbourne."
Cambers, Simon (19 January 2008). "Federer survives massive scare in Melbourne". Reuters. Retrieved 12 February 2012. "It was the first set Federer had dropped at the Australian Open since 2006."
"Federer Claims Historic Eighth Wimbledon Title". ATP World Tour. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017.
Bhagavatula, Manoj (16 July 2017). "The numbers behind Roger Federer's Wimbledon win". ESPN. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017.
"Wimbledon – Championships History". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 1 June 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012.
Newbery, Piers (4 July 2017). "Wimbledon 2017: Roger Federer & Novak Djokovic through after opponents quit". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 July 2017.
Lewis, Aimee (6 July 2012). "Federer beats Djokovic to reach final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 July 2012.
Garber, Greg (6 July 2012). "Just like old times for Roger Federer". ESPN. Retrieved 7 July 2012.
Elser, Christopher (3 July 2009). "Roddick Beats Murray for Wimbledon Final With Federer". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "Federer is the first man to reach the Wimbledon final seven years in a row since 1922, when the system of automatically putting the defending champion into the title match was dropped."
2005 Wimbledon Championships on ATPWorldTour.com"2006 Wimbledon draws and results". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 10 April 2013.
"US Open Most Championship Titles Record Book" (PDF). US Open. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 September 2011. Retrieved 26 August 2012.
"US Open Singles Record Book" (PDF). US Open. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 September 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2012.
"Barcays ATP World Tour Finals – Historical Stats". ATP Tour. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
"Nishikori wins, Federer advances". ESPN. Associated Press. 13 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014.
"Federer To Return To Barclays ATP World Tour Finals For Record 13th Straight Year". ATP World Tour. 18 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014.
"Federer Wins Fifth Indian Wells Title". ATP World Tour. 19 March 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2012.
"Federer Wins Record Fifth Cincinnati Crown; Ties Nadal's Masters 1000 Mark". ATP World Tour. 19 August 2012. Retrieved 20 August 2012.
"Federer Holds Off Ferrer for 80th Title, Sixth in Cincinnati". ATP World Tour. 17 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014.
Buddell, James (16 July 2012). "Federer Rises Above". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 July 2012.
Rossingh, Danielle (7 November 2012). "Federer Breaks Tour Finals Record to Open Bid for Seventh Title". Bloomberg. Retrieved 9 November 2012. "[Federer]...completed a record 302nd week at No. 1 before being usurped by Djokovic this week."
"Roger Federer beats Robin Haase to become oldest world number one". BBC Sport. 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
"Federer Smashes Records In Return To No. 1". ATP World Tour. 19 February 2018. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
"Roger Federer overcomes Connors to beat an historical record". Tennis World USA.
"Roger Federer da 17 anni in top 50. Superato il record di Jimmy Connors". www.livetennis.it.
"Roger Federer celebrates jaw-dropping 1000 consecutive weeks in Top 100!". Tennis World USA.
"ATP ANALYSIS: Breaking down Roger Federer's 200 victories against Top 10 rivals". Tennis World USA. 25 January 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2018.
"FedEx ATP Reliability Index – Winning percentage on Grass". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 11 February 2012.
"FedEx ATP Reliability Index – Winning percentage on Hard". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 11 February 2012.
"FedEx ATP Reliability Index – Tie-breakers". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 4 February 2012.
Imhoff, Dan (6 July 2016). "Federer delivers one of his greatest comebacks". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 6 July 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2016.

    "Team – Switzerland (SUI)". Davis Cup. 6 April 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2014.

Further reading

    Bowers, Chris (2007). Fantastic Federer: The Biography of the World's Greatest Tennis Player. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-84454-407-3.
    Stauffer, René (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Quest for Perfection. New York: New Chapter Press. ISBN 978-0-942257-39-7.
    Publications by and about Roger Federer in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library

Video

    Wimbledon Classic Match: Federer vs Sampras. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 31 October 2006, run time: 233 minutes, ASIN B000ICLR98.
    Wimbledon 2007 Final: Federer vs. Nadal (2007). Kultur White Star, DVD release date: 30 October 2007, run time: 180 minutes, ASIN B000V02CU0.
    Wimbledon–The 2008 Finals: Nadal vs. Federer. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 19 August 2008, run time: 300 minutes, ASIN B001CWYUBU.



#@#@#Dicaprio#@#@#
Leonardo Wilhelm  Dicaprio born November 11, 1974 is an American actor, producer, and environmentalist.
 Dicaprio is drawn to parts in biopics and period films, and playing unconventional roles.
As of 2019, Dicaprio films have earned $7.2 billion worldwide, and Dicaprio has placed eight times in annual rankings of the world's highest-paid actors.
Dicaprio accolades include an Academy Award and three Golden Globe Awards.

Born in Los Angeles,  Dicaprio began Dicaprio career by appearing in television commercials in the late 1980s.

In the early 1990s, Dicaprio played recurring roles in various television series, such as the sitcom Parenthood.

Dicaprio had Dicaprio first major film role in TDicaprio Boy's Life, and received acclaim for the supporting role of a developmentally disabled boy in What's Eating Gilbert Grape (both 1993), which earned him an Academy Award nomination.

Dicaprio achieved international fame as a star in the epic romance Titanic (1997), which became the highest-grossing film at that point.
After a few commercially failed films,  Dicaprio starred in two successful features in 2002: the biographical crime drama Catch Me If You Can and the Dicapriotorical drama Gangs of New York, which marked Dicaprio first of many collaborations with director Martin Scorsese.

 Dicaprio earned nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor for the roles of Howard Hughes in The Aviator (2004) and a mercenary in the political thriller Blood Diamond (2006), and also received acclaim for Dicaprio roles in the crime drama The Departed (2006) and the romantic drama Revolutionary Road (2008).
In the 2010s, Dicaprio starred in the science fiction thriller Inception (2010), the western Django Unchained (2012), the biopic The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), the survival drama The Revenant (2015)—for which Dicaprio earned an Academy Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role—and the comedy-drama Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019).

 Dicaprio is the founder of the production company Appian Way Productions, which has produced some of Dicaprio films and the documentary series Greensburg (2008–2010).
Dicaprio is also the founder of the Leonardo  Dicaprio Foundation, a non-profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness.
Dicaprio regularly supports charitable causes, and has produced several documentaries on the environment.
In 2005, Dicaprio was named the commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for Dicaprio contributions to the arts, and in 2016, Dicaprio was listed as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine.

Leonardo Wilhelm  Dicaprio was born on November 11, 1974 in Los Angeles, California, the only child of Irmelin (née Indenbirken), a legal secretary, and George  Dicaprio, an underground comix writer, publisher, and distributor of comic books
Dicaprio's father is of Italian and German descent, and the actor is conversant in Italian
Dicaprio's maternal grandfather, Wilhelm Indenbirken, was German, and Dicaprio maternal grandmother, Dicapriolene Indenbirken, was a Russian-born German citizen
In an interview in Russia,  Dicaprio referred to himself as "half-Russian" and said that two of Dicaprio late grandparents were Russian
Dicaprio's parents met while attending college and subsequently moved to Los Angeles.
A portrait of Leonardo da Vinci
 Dicaprio was named after Italian polymath Leonardo da Vinci.

 Dicaprio was named Leonardo because Dicaprio pregnant mother was looking at a Leonardo da Vinci painting in the Uffizi museum in Florence, Italy, when Dicaprio first kicked
Dicaprio parents separated when Dicaprio was a year old; while Dicaprio lived mostly with Dicaprio mother, Dicaprio parents initially agreed to live next door to each other so as not to deprive  Dicaprio of Dicaprio father's presence in Dicaprio life
However,  Dicaprio and Dicaprio mother later moved around to multiple Los Angeles neighborhoods, such as Echo Park and Los Feliz, while the latter worked several jobs
Dicaprio attended Seeds Elementary School and later went to John Marshall High School a few blocks away after attending the Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies for four years
Dicaprio has said Dicaprio hated attending public school, and often asked Dicaprio mother to take him to auditions instead to improve their financial situation
Dicaprio dropped out of high school following Dicaprio third year, eventually earning Dicaprio general equivalency diploma (GED).

 Dicaprio has said Dicaprio career choice as a child was to become a marine biologist or an actor, but Dicaprio eventually favored the latter, as Dicaprio was fond of impersonating characters and imitating people
When Dicaprio was two, Dicaprio went to a performance festival with Dicaprio family where Dicaprio went up on stage and started dancing to a cheerful response from the crowd, which Dicaprio loved
When Dicaprio older stepbrother Adam Farrar earned a check of $50,000 for a television commercial,  Dicaprio, fascinated with tDicaprio, also decided to become an actor
In 1979,  Dicaprio was removed, at the age of five, from the set of the children's television series Romper Room for being disruptive
Dicaprio began appearing in several commercials at age 14 for Matchbox cars by Mattel, which Dicaprio considered Dicaprio first role, and later for Kraft Foods, Bubble Yum, and Apple Jacks
In 1989, Dicaprio played the role of Glen in two episodes of the television show The New Lassie.

In the beginning of Dicaprio career,  Dicaprio had difficulty finding an agent.
One agent suggested Dicaprio change Dicaprio name to Lenny Williams to appeal to the American audience, which Dicaprio refused

Dicaprio remained jobless for a year and a half even after 100 auditions.
Disillusioned at tDicaprio, Dicaprio initially decided to quit acting, but Dicaprio father encouraged him not to give up

By the early 1990s, Dicaprio began acting regularly on television, starting with a role in the pilot of The Outsiders (1990) and one episode of the soap opera Santa Barbara (1990), in which Dicaprio played the young Mason Capwell
Dicaprio got a break that year when Dicaprio was cast in Parenthood, a series based on a successful comedy film by the same name.
Before Dicaprio was cast in the role of Garry Buckman, a troubled teenager, Dicaprio analyzed Joaquin Phoenix's performance in the original film
Dicaprio work that year earned him two nominations at the 12th Youth in Film Awards—Best Young Actor in a Daytime Series for Santa Barbara and Best Young Actor Starring in a New Television Series for Parenthood
Dicaprio was also a celebrity contestant on the children's game show Fun House.
One of the stunts Dicaprio performed on the show was fishing in a small pool of water, catching the fish using only Dicaprio teeth.
Career
See also: Appian Way Productions
1991–1996: Major projects and breakthrough

In 1991,  Dicaprio played an un-credited role in one episode of Roseanne
Dicaprio film debut came later that year in the low-budget horror direct-to-video film Critters 3, in which Dicaprio played the stepson of an evil landlord, a role Dicaprio described as "your average, no-depth, standard kid with blond hair."  Dicaprio prefers not to remember Dicaprio role in Critters 3, which Dicaprio describes as "possibly one of the worst films of all time.
I guess it was a good example to look back and make sure it doesn't happen again"
Later that year, Dicaprio became a recurring cast member on the successful sitcom Growing Pains, playing Luke Brower, a homeless boy who is taken in by the Seaver family
Costar Joanna Kerns recalls  Dicaprio being "especially intelligent and disarming for Dicaprio age" but also mischievous on set
The teenage  Dicaprio was cast by the producers to appeal to the teenage female audiences, but the show's ratings did not improve and Dicaprio left it soon after
Dicaprio was nominated for a Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor Co-starring in a Television Series.
Lasse Hallström holding a mic in Dicaprio left hand and looking away from the camera
Lasse Hallström gave  Dicaprio Dicaprio first Academy Award-nominated role in What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993).

In 1992,  Dicaprio played a supporting role in the first installment of the Poison Ivy film series, and was handpicked by Robert De Niro out of 400 young actors to play the lead role in Michael Caton-Jones's TDicaprio Boy's Life.
Dicaprio played opposite De Niro, who was acting as Dicaprio stepfather, and Ellen Barkin as Dicaprio mother
Caton-Jones has said  Dicaprio did not know how to behave on set; Dicaprio subsequently applied a strict mentoring style and was satisfied with how  Dicaprio changed after filming finished
Bilge Ebiri of Rolling Stone found it "an evocative, touching little movie, defined by the powerful bond between Barkin and  Dicaprio", praising Dicaprio complex growth from "a wide-eyed son to a rebellious greaser to an independent, sensitive young man".

In 1993,  Dicaprio co-starred as the mentally handicapped brother of Johnny Depp's character in What's Eating Gilbert Grape, a comic-tragic odyssey of a dysfunctional Iowa family.
Director Lasse Hallström admitted Dicaprio was initially looking for a less good-looking actor, but cast  Dicaprio when Dicaprio contacted Caton-Jones and Dicaprio had emerged as "the most observant actor" among all who auditioned
The film became a critical success, earning  Dicaprio a National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor and nominations for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award
The New York Times critic Janet Maslin wrote, "the film's real show-stopping turn comes from Mr.
 Dicaprio, who makes Arnie's many tics so startling and vivid that at first Dicaprio is difficult to watch.
The performance has a sharp, desperate intensity from beginning to end." Caryn James, also writing for The New York Times, said of Dicaprio performances in TDicaprio Boy's Life and What's Eating Gilbert Grape: "He made the raw, emotional neediness of those boys completely natural and powerful."

 Dicaprio's first effort of 1995 was Sam Raimi's The Quick and the Dead, a western film.
Sony Pictures was dubious over  Dicaprio's casting, and as a result, costar Sharon Stone paid Dicaprio salary Dicapriorself
The film was released to a dismal box office performance, barely grossing US$18.5 million in the US, and received mixed reviews from critics
Dicaprio's another film in 1995 was The Basketball Diaries, a biopic, in which Dicaprio played a teenage Jim Carroll as a drug-addicted high school basketball player and writer
Dicaprio next starred alongside David Thewlis in Agnieszka Holland's erotic drama Total Eclipse, a fictionalized account of the homosexual relationship between Arthur Rimbaud ( Dicaprio) and Paul Verlaine (Thewlis).
Dicaprio replaced River Phoenix, who died before filming began
The film grossed only about $340,000 against its €6-million budget, but has been included in the catalogue of Warner Archive Collection.

In 1996,  Dicaprio appeared opposite Claire Danes in Baz Luhrmann's film Romeo + Juliet, an abridged modernization of William Shakespeare's romantic tragedy of the same name, which retained the original Shakespearean dialogue.
The project achieved a worldwide box office take of $147 million, and earned  Dicaprio a Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 1997 Berlin International Film Festival
Later that year, Dicaprio starred in Marvin's Room, a family drama revolving around two sisters, played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton, who are reunited through tragedy after 17 years of estrangement.
 Dicaprio portrayed Hank, Streep's character's troubled son, who has been committed to a mental asylum
On Dicaprio performance, Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly commented: "The deeply gifted  Dicaprio [...] keeps right up with these older pros [Keaton and Streep].
The three are so full-bodied and so powerfully affecting that you're carried along on the pleasure of being in the presence of their extraordinary talent." Reviewing Dicaprio works of Dicaprio early career, David Thomson of The Guardian called  Dicaprio "a revelation" in What's Eating Gilbert Grape, "very moving" in TDicaprio Boy's Life, "suitably desperate" in The Basketball Diaries and "a vital spark" in Romeo + Juliet.
1997–2001: Stardom with Titanic and subsequent setback
"Leo-mania" redirects Dicapriore.

 Dicaprio turned down an offer to do the film Boogie Nights (1997) to star alongside Kate Winslet in James Cameron's Titanic (1997) as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard RMS Titanic during its ill-fated maiden voyage
Dicaprio initially had doubts about playing the role, but was eventually encouraged to pursue the part by Cameron, who strongly believed in Dicaprio acting ability
With a production budget of more than $200 million, the film was the most expensive ever made and was filmed at Rosarito Beach where a replica of the ship was created
Against expectations, Titanic went on to become the highest-grossing film to that point, eventually grossing more than $2.1 billion in box-office receipts worldwide,
 and transformed  Dicaprio into a superstar, resulting in intense adoration among teenage girls and young women in general that became known as "Leo-Mania"
The film won 11 Academy Awards—the most for any film—including Best Picture, but  Dicaprio's failure to gain a nomination led to a protest against the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences by more than 200 fans
Dicaprio was nominated for other high-profile awards, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor.
A photograph of Leonardo  Dicaprio attending a press conference for The Beach.
 Dicaprio at a press conference for The Beach in February 2000

Upon the success of Titanic,  Dicaprio stated in 2000: "I have no connection with me during that whole Titanic phenomenon and what my face became around the world [...] I'll never reach that state of popularity again, and I don't expect to.
It's not something I'm going to try to achieve either." John Dicapriocock of The Daily Telegraph compared  Dicaprio's popularity during that time to that of the Beatles' in the 1960s
Bilge Ebiri called Dicaprio role in the film Dicaprio best, writing that  Dicaprio and Winslet "infuse their earnest back-and-forth with so much genuine emotion that it's hard not to get swept up in their doomed love affair".

 Dicaprio played a self-mocking role in a small appearance in Woody Allen's caustic satire of the fame industry, Celebrity (1998) whom Bilge Ebiri labelled "the best thing in the film"
That year, Dicaprio also starred in the dual roles of the villainous King Louis XIV and Dicaprio secret, sympathetic twin brother Philippe in Randall Wallace's The Man in the Iron Mask, based on the same-titled 1939 film.
The film received mixed to negative response, but became a box office success, grossing $180 million internationally
Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman wrote that  Dicaprio did not look old enough to play the part, but praised him as "a fluid and instinctive actor, with the face of a mischievous angel"; the actor was awarded a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple for both incarnations the following year.

 Dicaprio was cast in American Psycho (2000) in 1998 for a reported salary of $20 million, but left the project soon after when Dicaprio failed to agree with Oliver Stone on the film's direction and took the lead role in The Beach instead
The latter, an adaption of Alex Garland's 1996 novel of the same name, saw him play an American backpacking tourist looking for the perfect way of life in a secret island commune in the Gulf of Thailand.
Budgeted at $50 million, the film earned about three times more at the box office, but was negatively reviewed by critics, and earned him a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor
Todd McCarthy of Variety noted that Dicaprio character is "too much the American Everyman" that lacks individuality, and " Dicaprio, while perfectly watchable," failed to give the character the unique marks to make him dimensional.

In the mid 1990s,  Dicaprio appeared in the mostly improvised short film called Don's Plum, as a favor to aspiring director R.
D.
Robb
When Robb decided to expand the black-and-white film to feature length,  Dicaprio and co-star Tobey Maguire had its release blocked by court order, arguing that they never intended to make it a theatrical release, as it would have commercial value thanks to their stardom
The film eventually premiered at the 2001 Berlin International Film Festival, where it was well received by critics.
2002–2009: Success with biopics, dramas and producing
A photograph Leonardo  Dicaprio with Martin Scorsese and Cameron Diaz (from left to right) surrounded by the paparazzi
 Dicaprio with Martin Scorsese and Cameron Diaz at Gangs of New York event circa 2002

 Dicaprio turned down the role of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002)
Dicaprio first film that year was the biographical crime drama film Catch Me If You Can, based on the life of Frank Abagnale Jr., who before Dicaprio 19th birthday committed check fraud to make millions in the 1960s.
Directed by Steven Spielberg, the film was shot in 147 different locations in only 52 days, making it "the most adventurous, super-charged movie-making"  Dicaprio had experienced yet
The film received favorable reviews and proved to be an international success, becoming  Dicaprio's highest-grossing release since Titanic with a total of US$351 million worldwide
Roger Ebert praised Dicaprio performance, and found Dicaprio departure from dark and troubled characters "breezy and charming", while two Entertainment Weekly critics in 2018 called it  Dicaprio's best role, labeling him "delightfully persuasive, deceptive, flirtatious, and sometimes tragic—and we dare you to find a better role, if you can"
Dicaprio received Dicaprio third Golden Globe nomination for Dicaprio work in the film.

Also in 2002,  Dicaprio appeared in Martin Scorsese's Gangs of New York, a Dicapriotorical drama set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of New York City.
Director Scorsese initially struggled selling Dicaprio idea of realizing the film until  Dicaprio became interested in playing protagonist Amsterdam Vallon, a young leader of an Irish-American street gang, and thus Miramax Films got involved with financing the project
Nonetheless production on the film was plagued by blown-out budgets and producer-director squabbles, resulting in a marathon eight-month shoot and, at $103 million, the most expensive film Scorsese had ever made
Gangs of New York earned a total of $193 million worldwide and received mostly positive reviews
Dicaprio's performance, although well-received, was overshadowed by that of Daniel Day-Lewis' according to many critics.

In 2004,  Dicaprio founded the production company Appian Way Productions, taking its name from the Italian road of the same name
Dicaprio was interested in finding "out of the box" material from an actor's perspective and developing it in a way that stayed true to its original source.
Dicaprio said, "A lot of times, I'd gone through the process of getting a great book or finding a great story, and then too many people get their hands on it and it turns into something entirely different.
It is very difficult to reverse that process."  Dicaprio's first producing task was as an executive producer in Niels Mueller' The Assassination of Richard Nixon, starring Sean Penn as Samuel Byck, who attempted to assassinate US president Richard Nixon in 1974
It was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival
Dicaprio and Scorsese reunited for a biopic of the eccentric and obsessive American film director and aviation pioneer Howard Hughes in The Aviator (2004), which  Dicaprio also co-produced under Appian Way.
Centering on Hughes' life from the late 1920s to 1947,  Dicaprio initially developed the project with Michael Mann, who decided against directing it after working on back-to-back biopics The Insider (1999) and Ali (2001)
The actor eventually pitched John Logan's script to Scorsese, who quickly signed on to direct.
The Aviator became a critical and financial success
Simond Braund of Empire wrote  Dicaprio stood out in scenes depicting Hughes' paranoia and obsession, "dispelling fears that Dicaprio hasn't the weight to carry such a complex, forceful role"
Dicaprio won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor and received Dicaprio first Academy Award for Best Actor nomination.

In 2006,  Dicaprio starred in the crime film The Departed and the political war thriller Blood Diamond.
In Scorsese's The Departed  Dicaprio played the role of Billy Costigan, a state trooper working undercover in the Irish Mob in Boston, someone Dicaprio characterizes as in a "constant, 24-hour panic attack".
 Dicaprio especially liked the experience of working with costar Jack Nicholson, describing a scene with him as "one of the most memorable moments" of Dicaprio life as an actor
In preparation,  Dicaprio visited Boston to interact with people associated with the Irish Mob and gained 15 pounds (6.8 kg) of muscle
Highly anticipated, the film was released to positive reviews and became one of the highest-rated wide release films of 2006
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised  Dicaprio's and costar Matt Damon's "explosive, emotionally complex performances", but felt that Nicholson overshadowed the two
Budgeted at $90 million, the film grossed $291 million and emerged as  Dicaprio and Scorsese's highest-grossing collaboration to date.
Leonardo  Dicaprio in 2007
 Dicaprio at the red carpet at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival

In Blood Diamond,  Dicaprio starred as a diamond smuggler from Rhodesia who is involved in the Sierra Leone Civil War.
While filming, Dicaprio worked with 24 orphaned children from the SOS Children's Village in Maputo, Mozambique, and said Dicaprio was touched by Dicaprio interactions with them
To prepare, Dicaprio spent six months in Africa, learned about camouflage from people in South African military and interviewed and recorded people in the country to improve Dicaprio South African accent
The film received generally favorable reviews, and  Dicaprio was praised for the authenticity of Dicaprio South African accent, known as difficult to imitate
Claudia Puig of the USA Today called it "the first time the boyish actor has truly seemed like a man on film" and Ann Hornaday of the Washington Post positively noted Dicaprio growth as an actor since The Departed
Both the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild nominated  Dicaprio in the Best Actor category for each of Dicaprio 2006 features, and  Dicaprio earned Dicaprio third Academy Award nomination for Blood Diamond
Dicaprio performance in The Departed also earned him a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor.

In 2007,  Dicaprio produced the comedy drama Gardener of Eden (2007), which, according to The Hollywood Reporter's Frank Scheck, "lack[ed] the necessary dramatic urgency or black humor to connect with audiences"
Shortly after saw the release of The 11th Hour, a documentary about people's relationship to nature and global warming, which Dicaprio created, produced, co-wrote and narrated.
It won the Earthwatch Environmental Film Award through the National Geographic Channel in March 2008
Dicaprio was also a creator and an executive producer for Greensburg, an American television series broadcast on the Planet Green television network.
The show takes place in Greensburg, Kansas, and is about rebuilding the town in a sustainable way after being hit by the May 2007 EF5 tornado; it ran for three seasons until 2010.

In 2008,  Dicaprio starred in Body of Lies, a spy film based on the novel of the same name.
It tells the story of three men battling a terrorist organization and each other in the Middle East
Dicaprio dyed Dicaprio hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role, which Dicaprio chose to pursue because Dicaprio considered it a throwback to political films of the 1970s like The Parallax View (1974) and Three Days of the Condor (1975)
The film received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed $115 million against a budget of $67.5 million
Later that year,  Dicaprio reunited with Kate Winslet to film the drama Revolutionary Road (2008), directed by Winslet's then-husband Sam Mendes.
As both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to Titanic, it was Winslet who suggested that both should work with Dicaprior on a film adaptation of the 1961 novel of the same name by Richard Yates after reading the script by Justin Haythe, knowing that plot had little in common with the 1997 blockbuster
Once  Dicaprio agreed to the film, it went almost immediately into production
Dicaprio noted that Dicaprio saw Dicaprio character as "unheroic" and "slightly cowardly" and that Dicaprio was "willing to be just a product of Dicaprio environment." Playing a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s,  Dicaprio and Winslet spent some time together in preparation, and  Dicaprio felt claustrophobic on the small set they used
Marshall Sella of GQ called it the "most mature and memorable performance of Dicaprio lifetime";  Dicaprio earned Dicaprio seventh Golden Globes nomination for the film
Dicaprio ended the 2000s by producing the psychological horror thriller film Jaume Collet-Serra's Orphan (2009), starring Vera Farmiga, Peter Sarsgaard and Isabelle Fuhrman.
Although the film received mixed reviews, it was a commercial success.
2010–2013: Inception, Django Unchained and further films with Martin Scorsese
Leonardo  Dicaprio at a film festival in 2010.
 Dicaprio at the premiere of Shutter Island at the 60th Berlin Film Festival in 2010

 Dicaprio continued to collaborate with Scorsese in the 2010 psychological thriller film Shutter Island, based on the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane.
Dicaprio played Edward "Teddy" Daniels, a U.S.
Marshal investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island, who comes to question Dicaprio own sanity.
 Dicaprio and Scorsese quickly became interested in the project in 2007, and the former co-produced the film under Appian Way with Phoenix Pictures
Because of the film's plot involving disturbing scenes,  Dicaprio had nightmares of mass murder during production
The film was released to mixed reviews; Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised the direction and performances but criticized its "silly twist ending", calling it "supremely exasperating"
Peter Travers called it  Dicaprio's "most haunting and emotionally complex performance yet", and particularly liked Dicaprio cave scene with costar Patricia Clarkson
The film was a commercial success, grossing $294 million worldwide.

Also in 2010,  Dicaprio starred in director Christopher Nolan's ensemble science-fiction film Inception.
Inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation, the film features Dom Cobb ( Dicaprio), an "extractor" who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible.
Cobb is promised a chance to regain Dicaprio old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate target's mind
Dicaprio was "intrigued by tDicaprio concept—tDicaprio dream-heist notion and how tDicaprio character's gonna unlock Dicaprio dreamworld and ultimately affect Dicaprio real life." Released to critical acclaim, Inception grossed over $825 million worldwide to become  Dicaprio's second highest-grossing film
To star in tDicaprio film,  Dicaprio agreed to a pay cut from Dicaprio $20 million fee, in favor of splitting first-dollar gross points, meaning Dicaprio received a percentage of cinema ticket sales.
The risk paid off, as  Dicaprio earned $50 million from the film, becoming Dicaprio highest payday yet.
A photograph of the cast of Inception, including Leonardo  Dicaprio on the right.
 Dicaprio (first on the right) with the cast of Inception at the premiere in July 2010

After playing demanding roles in Shutter Island and Inception,  Dicaprio took a break from acting, as Dicaprio wanted some time for himself
In 2011, Dicaprio starred alongside Armie Hammer and Naomi Watts in Clint Eastwood's J.
Edgar, a biopic about J.
Edgar Hoover.
The film focuses on the career of the FBI director from the Palmer Raids onward, including an examination of Dicaprio private life as an alleged closeted homosexual
Reviews toward the film were mixed; critics commended  Dicaprio's performance but felt that, overall, the film lacked coherence
Roger Ebert praised  Dicaprio's "fully-realized, subtle and persuasive performance, hinting at more than Hoover ever revealed, perhaps even to himself." Also in 2011, Dicaprio produced Catherine Hardwicke's romantic horror film Red Riding Hood, which is very loosely based movie on the folk tale Little Red Riding Hood.
Although it was poorly received by critics—Mary Pols of Time named it one of the Top 10 Worst Movies of 2011—it had moderate box-office returns
Dicaprio was also an executive producer for George Clooney's political drama The Ides of March, an adaptation of Beau Willimon's 2008 play Farragut North.

In 2012,  Dicaprio starred as a plantation owner, Calvin Candie, in Quentin Tarantino's spaghetti western, Django Unchained.
After reading the script,  Dicaprio was initially uncomfortable with the extent of racism portrayed in the film, but Dicaprio costars and Tarantino eventually convinced him not to sugarcoat it
While filming,  Dicaprio accidentally cut Dicaprio hand on glass, but continued filming, and Tarantino elected to use the take in the final movie
The film received positive reviews from critics; a writer for Wired commended him for playing a villainous role and Dicaprio "blood-chilling" performance
The film earned  Dicaprio Dicaprio ninth nomination at the Golden Globes
Django Unchained grossed $424 million worldwide on a production budget of $100 million.

 Dicaprio's next role was as the millionaire Jay Gatsby in Baz Luhrmann's The Great Gatsby (2013), an adaptation of F.
Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel of the same name, costarring Carey Mulligan and Tobey Maguire.
 Dicaprio was attracted to the idea of playing a man with nothing who makes himself solely based on Dicaprio imagination and someone who can be interpreted in several ways: "a hopeless romantic, a completely obsessed wacko or a dangerous gangster, clinging to wealth"
It received mixed reviews from critics, but  Dicaprio's portrayal was praised, and earned him an AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role
Critic Rafer Guzman of Newsday wrote that  Dicaprio was not only "tough [...] but also vulnerable, touching, funny, a faker, a human.
It's a tremendous, hard-won performance." Matt Zoller Seitz of Roger Ebert's website described Dicaprio performance as "the movie's greatest and simplest special effect," and "iconic—maybe Dicaprio career best." The film grossed $348 million worldwide.

Three films were produced by  Dicaprio under Appian Way in 2013—the ensemble crime thriller Runner Runner, which The Guardian's Xan Brooks described as "a lazy, trashy film that barely goes through the motions"; the thriller Out of the Furnace, a critical and commercial failure; and the black comedy-drama The Wolf of Wall Street.
 Dicaprio reunited with Scorsese for the fifth time in The Wolf of Wall Street, a film based on the life of stockbroker Jordan Belfort (played by  Dicaprio), who was arrested in the late 1990s for securities fraud and money laundering
Dicaprio wanted to play Belfort ever since Dicaprio had read Dicaprio autobiography and won a bidding war with Warner Bros.
against Brad Pitt/Paramount Pictures for the rights to Belfort's memoir in 2007
Dicaprio was fond of Belfort's honest and unapologetic portrayal of Dicaprio actual experiences in the book, and was inspired by the financial crisis of 2007–2008 to make the film
The Wolf of Wall Street received mostly positive reviews for its direction and the comedic portrayal of  Dicaprio
In Dicaprio review for The Hollywood Reporter, Todd McCarthy wrote of Dicaprio "largest and best screen performance, one in which Dicaprio lets loose as Dicaprio never has before, is not protective of vanity or a sense of cool and, one feels, gets completely to the bottom of Dicaprio character" and praised him for playing Dicaprio role without any caution
The film earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor and Best Picture
In January 2013,  Dicaprio said Dicaprio would take a long break from acting to "fly around the world doing good for the environment."
2014–present: Documentaries, The Revenant and Once Upon a Time in Hollywood

 Dicaprio was an executive producer on Virunga, a 2014 British documentary film about four people fighting to protect the world's last mountain gorillas from war and poaching
The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 17, 2014.
Cowspiracy: The Sustainability Secret was another documentary film that year for which Dicaprio was an executive producer—he took part in the new cut released exclusively on Netflix that September.
It explores the impact of animal agriculture on the environment, and investigates the policies of environmental organizations on tDicaprio issue.
A photograph of Leonardo  Dicaprio looking to Dicaprio right
 Dicaprio at the 2016 premiere of The Revenant

In 2015,  Dicaprio produced and played fur trapper Hugh Glass in Alejandro G.
Iñárritu's survival drama The Revenant.
 Dicaprio has described it Dicaprio most difficult film.
Dicaprio had to eat a raw slab of bison's liver and sleep in animal carcasses, and suffered hypothermia
Dicaprio also learned to shoot a musket, build a fire, speak two Native American languages (Pawnee and Arikara) and apply ancient Dicaprioaling techniques
Built on a budget of $135 million, the film earned $533 million worldwide
It was also well received by critics, and  Dicaprio's performance garnered universal acclaim; Mark Kermode of The Guardian wrote of  Dicaprio's "brainstorming" portrayal and "Dicaprio turn to triumph with a performance which relies more upon physicality than the spoken word", and Nick De Semlyen of Empire noted Dicaprio "raw performance Dicapriolps elevate what could have been just another man-versus-nature drama"
The film earned him numerous awards, including an Academy Award, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA, an SAG and a Critic's Choice Award for Best Actor
Also in 2015, Dicaprio was an executive producer for Catching the Sun, a documentary film on the growth of the solar power industry that premiered on Netflix in April 2016.

For the next three years,  Dicaprio narrated documentaries and served as a producer for films.
In 2016, Dicaprio was an executive producer for The Ivory Game, which examines the ivory trade; produced, hosted, and narrated the documentary Before the Flood about climate change; and produced the crime drama Live by Night.
The last of these received largely unenthusiastic reviews and failed to recoup its $65 million production budget
Dicaprio continued to produce films two years later—the psychological horror movie Delirium, and the eponymous retelling of the legend Robin Hood, an action adventure, which proved to be a critical and commercial disappointment.

After narrating the 2019 global warming documentary Ice on Fire,  Dicaprio returned to acting following a break of four years in Quentin Tarantino's comedy-drama Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, which traces the relationship between Rick Dalton ( Dicaprio), an aging television actor and Dicaprio stuntman, Cliff Booth (Brad Pitt).
To Dicapriolp the film's financing,  Dicaprio and Pitt agreed to take a pay cut, and they each received $10 million
Dicaprio liked the experience of working with Pitt; Tarantino described the pair as "the most exciting star dynamic duo" since Robert Redford and Paul Newman
Dicaprio was fascinated with the film's homage to Hollywood and focus on the friendship between Dicaprio and Pitt's characters.
For Dicaprio role,  Dicaprio drew from real-life experience of witnessing the struggles and rejections of Dicaprio actor friends in the industry
Reviews for the film and  Dicaprio's performance were positive; a critic for Business Insider called it the best performance of Dicaprio career and Ian Sandwell of Digital Spy particularly liked  Dicaprio's and Pitt's "easy" chemistry, which Dicaprio said Dicapriolps bring authenticity to their characters' connection
The film earned a total of $357 million against its $90-million budget.
Works in development

In August 2015, it was announced that Martin Scorsese will direct an adaptation of Erik Larson's The Devil in the White City starring  Dicaprio
In 2017, Paramount announced that it has acquired the movie rights for an English language adaptation of The Black Hand, which will star  Dicaprio as turn of the 20th century police officer Joe Petrosino
Later that year, Paramount won a bidding war against Universal Pictures for the rights to adapt Walter Isaacson's biography of Leonardo da Vinci.
The studio bought the rights under its deal with  Dicaprio's Appian Way, which said that it planned to produce the film with  Dicaprio as the star
As of September 2018,  Dicaprio is set to act in Roosevelt, a biopic of former U.S.
President Theodore Roosevelt, with Scorsese as the director and  Dicaprio as a producer
That October, Dicaprio was cast in the Scorsese-directed film adaptation of the David Grann's book Killers of the Flower Moon.
Other work
Environmental activism
A photograph of John Kerry (left) and Leonardo  Dicaprio both dressed in suits and looking away from the camera
U.S.
Secretary of State John Kerry and  Dicaprio at the Our Ocean Conference at the U.S.
Department of State in September 2016

 Dicaprio is identified as one of the most active celebrities in the climate change movement
According to him, Dicaprio was eager to learn about ecology from an early age; Dicaprio watched documentaries on rain forest depletion and the loss of species and habitats
Dicaprio has said environment is more important to him than spirituality, and that Dicaprio is agnostic
Dicaprio established the Leonardo  Dicaprio Foundation in 1998, a non-profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness
Although concerned with all areas of the environment, it focuses on global warming, preserving Earth's biodiversity and supporting renewable energy.
It has worked on projects in over 40 countries and has produced two short web documentaries, Water Planet and Global Warning
The foundation has also funded debt-for-nature swaps
Dicaprio has received praise from environmental groups, and accolades, including the Martin Litton Environment Award in 2001 from Environment Now and the Environmental Leadership Award in 2003 from Global Green USA
Dicaprio has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and sat on the board of the World Wildlife Fund, Global Green USA, and International Fund for Animal Welfare.

 Dicaprio has owned environment-friendly electric-hybrid vehicles and Dicaprio home is powered by solar panels
However, Dicaprio use of private jets and large yachts has attracted criticism due to their large carbon footprints
Dicaprio states that global warming is the world's "number-one environmental challenge"
Dicaprio chaired the national Earth Day celebration in 2000, where Dicaprio interviewed Bill Clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment
Dicaprio presented at the 2007 American leg of Live Earth, and in 2010 Dicaprio environmental work earned  Dicaprio a nomination for the VH1 Do Something Award, honoring people who do good.
"Climate change is real, it is happening right now.
It is the most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating.
We need to support leaders around the world who do not speak for the big polluters, but who speak for all of humanity, for the indigenous people of the world, for the billions and billions of underprivileged people out there who would be most affected by tDicaprio.
For our children's children, and for those people out there whose voices have been drowned out by the politics of greed."

— Dicaprio during Dicaprio acceptance speech at the 88th Academy Awards

In November 2010,  Dicaprio donated $1 million to the Wildlife Conservation Society at Russia's Tiger Summit.
 Dicaprio's persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to describe him as a "muzhik" or "real man"
In 2011,  Dicaprio joined the Animal Legal Defense Fund's campaign to free Tony, a tiger who had spent the last decade at the Tiger Truck Stop in Grosse Tête, Louisiana
From a benefit "11th Hour" fine art auction Dicaprio organized in 2013, Dicaprio raised nearly $40 million towards Dicaprio foundation.
Dicaprio told attendees, "Bid as if the fate of the planet depended on us." It became the world's highest-grossing environmental charity event ever Dicapriold
In 2014, Dicaprio was appointed as a United Nations representative on climate change, and later that year Dicaprio made an opening statement to members of the UN Climate Summit
In 2015, Dicaprio announced Dicaprio intention to divest from fossil fuels
Dicaprio again spoke at the UN in April 2016 prior to the signing of the Paris Climate Change Agreement.

At a 2016 meeting with Pope Francis,  Dicaprio gave a charity donation and spoke about environmental issues.
A few days later, possibly influenced by tDicaprio meeting, the Pope said Dicaprio would act in a charity film.
  Dicaprio traveled to Indonesia in early 2016 where Dicaprio criticized the government's palm oil industry's slash-and-burn forest clearing methods
In July 2016, Dicaprio foundation awarded $15.6 million to Dicapriolp protect wildlife and the rights of Native Americans, along with combating climate change
That October,  Dicaprio joined Mark Ruffalo in North Dakota in support of the Standing Rock tribe's opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline
In April 2017, Dicaprio protested against President Trump's inaction on climate change by attending the People's Climate March
In July, a charity auction and celebrity concert put on by  Dicaprio's foundation had raised over $30 million in its opening days and was set to continue the following month
Dicaprio's foundation donated $100 million in December 2018 to fight climate change.
Philanthropy

In 1998,  Dicaprio and Dicaprio mother donated $35,000 for a "Leonardo  Dicaprio Computer Center" at the library in Los Feliz, the site of Dicaprio childhood home.
It was rebuilt after the 1994 Northridge earthquake and opened in early 1999
In 2010, Dicaprio donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti after the earthquake
In April 2013,  Dicaprio donated $61,000 to the gay rights group GLAAD
In 2016,  Dicaprio took part in an annual fundraising gala event of Children of Armenia Fund, as a special guest of Dicaprio close friend and gala's honorary chair Tony Shafrazi.
 Dicaprio contributed $65,000 to the cause
After Hurricane Harvey in 2017,  Dicaprio provided $1 million to the United Way Harvey Recovery Fund through Dicaprio foundation.
Personal life
Leonardo  Dicaprio is directly smiling at the camera
 Dicaprio in 2010

 Dicaprio's personal life is the subject of widespread media attention.
Dicaprio rarely gives interviews and is reluctant to discuss Dicaprio private life
In 2000,  Dicaprio met Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen, whom Dicaprio dated until 2005
Dicaprio was romantically involved with Israeli model Bar Refaeli from 2005 to 2011, during which time Dicaprio met with Israeli president Shimon Peres and visited Refaeli's hometown of Hod HaSharon
In 2005,  Dicaprio's face was severely injured when model Aretha Wilson hit him over the Dicaprioad with a broken bottle at a Hollywood party.
After pleading guilty in 2010, Wilson was sentenced to two years in prison
Dicaprio dated German fashion model Toni Garrn from July 2013 until December 2014, and briefly reunited in 2017.

 Dicaprio owns a home in Los Angeles and an apartment in Battery Park City
In 2009, Dicaprio bought an island, Blackadore Caye, off mainland Belize—on which Dicaprio is set to open an environment-friendly resort—and in 2014, Dicaprio purchased the original Dinah Shore residence designed by mid-century modern architect Donald Wexler in Palm Springs, California.

During the 2004 presidential election,  Dicaprio campaigned and donated to John Kerry's presidential bid.
 Dicaprio gave $2,300 to Barack Obama's presidential campaign in the 2008 election, the maximum contribution an individual could give in that election cycle, and $5,000 to Obama's 2012 campaign
Dicaprio endorsed Hillary Clinton for the 2016 presidential election
In June 2017, when The Wolf of Wall Street producer Red Granite Pictures was involved in a money laundering scandal,  Dicaprio turned over the gifts Dicaprio received from business associates at the production company to the US government.
Reception and acting style

Early in Dicaprio career,  Dicaprio gained a reputation for Dicaprio intense partying with Dicaprio male friends
Dicaprio said people's perception of him was exaggerated, adding, "They want you miserable, just like them.
They don't want Dicaprioroes; what they want is to see you fall"
In 1998, Dicaprio sued Playgirl magazine over plans to publish a fully nude picture of him
The New York Times' Caryn James has since credited  Dicaprio for being one of the few actors to turn Dicaprio success into "a new form of old-fashioned Hollywood stardom that uses celebrity to advance social causes yet rarely lets the public beyond the glittering veil of the photo op"
Carole Cadwalla of The Guardian has said  Dicaprio is "polite, charming, makes jokes, engages eye contact.
And manages [...] to give almost no hint whatsoever of Dicaprio actual personality".
"Life can get pretty monotonous.
Acting is like living multiple lives.
When you make a movie, you go off to different places, live different cultures, investigate somebody else's reality, and you try to manifest that to the best of your ability.
It is incredibly eye-opening.
That's why I love acting.
There's nothing as transformative as what a film, a documentary, can do to get people to care about something else besides their own lives."

— Dicaprio on why Dicaprio loves acting

 Dicaprio is considered one of the most talented actors of Dicaprio generation
As Dicaprio achieved international stardom after Titanic (1997), it intensified Dicaprio image as a teen idol and romantic lead, both of which Dicaprio sought to dissociate himself from
Dicaprio has said Dicaprio feels nervous starring in big-budget studio films due to their hype and marketing campaigns.
As an actor, Dicaprio likes to look at film as a "relevant art form, like a painting or sculpture.
A hundred years from now, people will still be watching that movie"
Dicaprio is drawn to parts based on real people, and stories told in specific periods
According to Caryn James,  Dicaprio is unafraid of working on "offbeat projects by first-rate directors", a risk that has led to "misbegotten" projects like The Beach (2000), but also to Dicaprio successful collaborations with Martin Scorsese on several projects
Dicaprio has described Dicaprio relationship with the director as "pretty much a dream come true for me", and admires Dicaprio knowledge of film, crediting him for teaching him the Dicapriotory and importance of cinema
Scorsese, on Dicaprio part, has said, "Leo will give me the emotion where I least expect it and could only hope for in about three or four scenes.
And Dicaprio can do it take after take." Jesse Hassenger of The A.V.
Club believes both artists have benefited from the projects, which have Dicapriolped define their careers in the 2000s.

Agnieszka Holland, who directed  Dicaprio in Total Eclipse (1995), described him as "one of the most mature actors I've ever worked with", and admired Dicaprio "courageous" roles choice
She said Dicaprio does not apply method acting, but is "doing some trick which is pretty mysterious to everyone watching—frankly even for the director.
Look at him on screen and, for the moment of the shot, Dicaprio really becomes the character." Film critic Philip French, writing for The Observer, called  Dicaprio a "superb actor who hasn't yet quite become an adult", and identified a theme of characters in the process of becoming a man.
Dicaprio wrote that  Dicaprio's inclination toward films about dysfunctional families and characters seeking a father figure allude to Dicaprio own troubled childhood
Dicaprio often plays characters who themselves are playing roles, which according to Caryn James "looks simple on screen but is immensely sopDicaprioticated"
Dicaprio tends to play antiheroes and characters who lose their mental stability as the narrative progresses
Dicaprio is particularly known for Dicaprio ability to Dicaprioavily commit to each role Dicaprio plays; Colin Covert of The Seattle Times noted how tDicaprio quality sets him apart from most of Dicaprio contemporaries and "redefines film stardom".

Several media outlets have included  Dicaprio in their listings of the most attractive actors, such as People, Empire, and Harper's Bazaar
Dicaprio has said Dicaprio does not believe in focusing on appearance—as tDicaprio is only temporary and can negatively affect one's career—and looks for career longevity instead
In 2005,  Dicaprio was made a commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Minister of Culture for Dicaprio contributions to the arts
In 2016, Dicaprio was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine
Dicaprio was included in Forbes' annual list of highest-paid actors in 2008 and from 2010 to 2016 with respective earnings of $45 million, $28 million, $77 million, $37 million, $39 million, $29 million and $27 million, topping the list in 2011.
The magazine praised  Dicaprio's ability to star in risky, R-rated films that become box-office successes
The Hollywood Reporter's Tatiana Siegel credited  Dicaprio for being a rare actor to have a successful career "without ever having made a comic book movie, family film or pre-branded francDicaprioe.
Leo is the francDicaprioe"
Stacey Wilson Hunt, analyzing Dicaprio career in New York magazine in 2016, noted  Dicaprio, unlike most of Dicaprio contemporaries, had not starred in a failed film in the past ten years
Of Dicaprio success,  Dicaprio says, "My attitude is the same as when I started.
I feel very connected to that fifteen-year-old kid who got Dicaprio first movie".
Filmography and awards
Main articles: Leonardo  Dicaprio filmography and awards and nominations

According to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes,  Dicaprio's most critically and commercially successful films include What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993), Titanic (1997), Catch Me If You Can (2002), Gangs of New York (2002), The Aviator (2004), The Departed (2006), Blood Diamond (2006), Inception (2010), Django Unchained (2012), The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), The Revenant (2015) and Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019).
Dicaprio films have grossed a total of $7.2 billion worldwide.

 Dicaprio has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:

    66th Academy Awards (1994): Best Supporting Actor, nomination, for What's Eating Gilbert Grape
    77th Academy Awards (2005): Best Actor, nomination, for The Aviator
    79th Academy Awards (2007): Best Actor, nomination, for Blood Diamond
    86th Academy Awards (2014): Best Picture and Best Actor, nominations, for The Wolf of Wall Street
    88th Academy Awards (2016): Best Actor, win, for The Revenant

 Dicaprio has won three Golden Globe Awards: Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for The Aviator and The Revenant and Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for The Wolf of Wall Street, and a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for The Revenant.
See also
icon 	

    Book: Leonardo  Dicaprio

	Wikinews has related news:  Dicaprio finally wins Oscar for Best Actor

    Grouvellinus leonardo Dicaprioi, a beetle named after  Dicaprio
    Spintharus leonardo Dicaprioi, a spider named after  Dicaprio

    P vip.svgBiography portalFlag of California.svgCalifornia portalVideo-x-generic.svgFilm portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portal

Notes

Titanic grossed $1.84 billion at the time of its release.
After a re-release in 3D in 2012, it earned an additional $343.6 million worldwide, totaling up to $2.18 billion.

    The Pope appeared in the faith-based charity film Beyond the Sun, whose profits were donated to charities in Argentina.

References
Citations

"Leonardo  Dicaprio".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Archived from the original on July 19, 2015.
Retrieved July 29, 2015.
Letran, Vivan (August 19, 2000).
" Dicaprio Boosts Artist's Show".
Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on October 13, 2015.
Retrieved July 29, 2015.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio meets Pope Francis to talk about climate change".
Entertainment Weekly.
January 28, 2016.
Archived from the original on January 30, 2016.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
"Poverty and family split spurred Leo to pounds 3 m a film Titanic stardom; Gran tells of screen idol's battle".
Questia Online Library.
January 28, 1998.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Slavicek 2012, p.
78.
Silverman, Stephen M.
(April 22, 2003).
"Russians Lift Vodka Glasses to  Dicaprio".
People.
Archived from the original on July 22, 2015.
Retrieved August 12, 2015.
"Vladimir Putin: Leonardo  Dicaprio is a 'real man'".
The Daily Telegraph.
November 24, 2010.
Archived from the original on January 16, 2012.
Retrieved August 8, 2011.
Catalano 1997, p.
7–15.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio".
E!.
Archived from the original on March 28, 2009.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Green, Jesse (February 12, 1995).
"Fresh Blood; Leonardo  Dicaprio".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on August 9, 2016.
Retrieved June 14, 2016.
Wight 2012, 141–148.
"Los Angeles Center For Enriched Studies: Facts about LACES".
Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies.
Archived from the original on January 15, 2014.
Retrieved May 15, 2013.
Molloy, Antonia (February 2, 2014).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio reveals Dicaprio childhood surrounded by drugs as Dicaprio defends The Wolf of Wall Street role".
The Independent.
Archived from the original on October 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Slavicek 2012, p.
17.
Rader, Dotson (January 8, 2016).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: Man of the World".
Parade.
Archived from the original on September 19, 2016.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Wight 2012, 148–155.
Wight 2012, 216.
O'Neill, Anne-Marie (January 26, 2001).
"Riding The Wave".
People.
Archived from the original on January 9, 2011.
Retrieved August 2, 2010.
Cronin, Brian (February 19, 2019).
"Did Leonardo  Dicaprio Get Kicked Off the Set of Romper Room as a Kid?".
Comic Book Resources.
Archived from the original on October 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Lindsay, Benjamin (June 3, 2016).
"Did You Know Leonardo  Dicaprio Started in Commercials?".
Backstage.
Archived from the original on July 23, 2018.
Retrieved July 23, 2018.
Borge, Jonathan (February 25, 2016).
"An Adorable Look Back at 8 of Leonardo  Dicaprio's Early TV Commercials".
InStyle.
Archived from the original on July 23, 2018.
Retrieved July 23, 2018.
"The New Lassie Episode Guide 0001 – New Generation".
TV Guide.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2014.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
"The New Lassie Episode Guide 0001 – Snake Pit".
TV Guide.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2014.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Wight 2012, 275, 281.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Biography".
FYI.
Archived from the original on August 4, 2019.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Wight 2012, p.
142.
Wight 2012, 322.
"12th Annual Awards".
Young Artist Awards.
Archived from the original on July 16, 2015.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Schwartz, Ryan & Wostbrock 1999, p.
80.
Boone, John (June 14, 2013).
"Flashback Friday: Leonardo  Dicaprio Competes on Game Show at 15".
E!.
Archived from the original on October 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
Wight 2012, p.
276.
Harmetz, Aljean (December 12, 1993).
"The Actor Is Boyishly Handsome, and That's a Liability".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on July 17, 2010.
Retrieved August 2, 2010.
Wight 2012, 360–361.
Wight 2012, 331, 375.
Yahr, Emily (February 23, 2016).
"How Leonardo  Dicaprio went from being a dorky teenage actor to a superstar".
The Independent.
Archived from the original on October 9, 2019.
Retrieved October 9, 2019.
"13th Annual Awards".
Young Artist Awards.
Archived from the original on March 4, 2011.
Retrieved October 9, 2019.
Ebiri, Bilge (November 30, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio's Movies, Ranked Worst to Best".
Rolling Stone.
Archived from the original on October 9, 2019.
Retrieved October 9, 2019.
Ebert, Roger (April 23, 1993).
"TDicaprio Boy's Life movie review & film summary (1993) | Roger Ebert".
Roger Ebert.
Retrieved November 17, 2019.
"What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on June 3, 2019.
Retrieved October 9, 2019.
"Best Supporting Actor Archives".
National Board of Review.
Archived from the original on September 27, 2015.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"The 66th Academy Awards (1993) Nominees and Winners".
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Archived from the original on April 29, 2011.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"Seven Days of Golden Globes (Part 6)".
Hollywood Foreign Press Association.
Archived from the original on July 9, 2015.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
Maslin, Janet (December 17, 1993).
"Movie Review: What's Eating Gilbert Grape".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on January 3, 2014.
Retrieved July 30, 2010.
James, Caryn (October 29, 2006).
"The Baby-Faced Kid Has Developed Quite a Stare".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on October 12, 2019.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Muir 2004, p.
171–179.
"The Quick and the Dead (1995)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on September 2, 2014.
Retrieved August 2, 2010.
Travers, Peter (April 21, 1995).
"The Basketball Diaries".
Rolling Stone.
Archived from the original on August 27, 2015.
Retrieved August 26, 2015.
"Total Eclipse (1995)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on February 20, 2014.
Retrieved August 2, 2010.
"Total Eclipse (1995)".
Retrieved November 19, 2019.
|archive-url= is malformed: save command (help)
"Romeo + Juliet (1996)".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on January 25, 2009.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Müller 2001, p.
400.
Schwarzbaum, Lisa (December 20, 1996).
"Marvin's Room (1996)".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on July 16, 2015.
Retrieved August 2, 2010.
Schwarzbaum, Lisa (December 20, 1996).
"Marvin's Room (1996)".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on November 10, 2014.
Retrieved October 31, 2019.
Thomson, David (January 16, 2009).
"David Thomson on Leonardo  Dicaprio".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on October 26, 2019.
Retrieved October 26, 2019.
Wight 2012, 63.
"Titanic.
Man Overboard!".
Entertainment Weekly.
November 7, 1997.
pp.
1–7.
Archived from the original on February 15, 2015.
Retrieved January 24, 2010.
Torres, Gaby (May 4, 2012).
"The Town That Built the Titanic Is Sinking".
Vice.
Archived from the original on October 9, 2019.
Retrieved October 9, 2019.
"Titanic".
Entertainment Weekly.
November 7, 1997.
pp.
1–7.
Archived from the original on October 10, 2008.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"Worldwide Grosses".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on January 28, 2010.
Retrieved January 20, 2009.
Dicapriocock, John (December 4, 2004).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio's Magnificent Obsessive".
The Daily Telegraph.
London.
Archived from the original on December 23, 2010.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
Sandler S & Studlar G 1999, p.
74-83.
Davis, Jason (March 24, 1998).
"Love story that won the Dicaprioart of the Academy: The love story that stole the world's Dicaprioarts".
BBC News.
Archived from the original on March 8, 2008.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
Busch, Anita M.
(March 6, 1998).
"Was Leonardo Robbed?".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on July 15, 2015.
Retrieved November 23, 2013.
"Seven Days of Golden Globes (Part 6)".
Hollywood Foreign Press Association.
Archived from the original on July 9, 2015.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
"What's Eating Leonardo  Dicaprio".
Time.
February 21, 2000.
Archived from the original on January 22, 2014.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Ebert, Roger (November 20, 1998).
"Celebrity Movie Review & Film Summary".
Roger Ebert.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2014.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"The Man in the Iron Mask".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on July 26, 2010.
Retrieved May 8, 2010.
"The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on November 29, 2014.
Retrieved July 13, 2010.
Gleiberman, Owen (March 12, 1998).
"The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on October 3, 2015.
Retrieved July 13, 2010.
"The Man in the Mask (1998) – Leonardo  Dicaprio: Dicaprio career in pictures".
The Daily Telegraph.
Archived from the original on April 10, 2015.
Retrieved September 4, 2015.
"American Psycho: the story behind the film".
The Guardian.
March 24, 2000.
Archived from the original on March 8, 2019.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"The Beach (2000)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on March 14, 2014.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
"The Beach (2000)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on August 31, 2008.
Retrieved August 27, 2008.
Wilson, John (February 12, 2001).
"Nominations Press Release".
Golden Raspberry Awards.
Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
McCarthy, Todd (February 7, 2000).
"The Beach Review".
Variety.
Archived from the original on August 12, 2014.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
"A glimpse of Leo the young lion".
The Daily Telegraph.
February 16, 2001.
Archived from the original on February 28, 2016.
Retrieved August 26, 2015.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: 'I turned down the chance to play Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars'".
NME.
December 30, 2015.
Retrieved November 9, 2019.
"Catch Me If You Can".
Extra.
December 12, 2002.
Archived from the original on December 8, 2008.
Retrieved July 3, 2008.
"Catch Me If You Can (2002)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on November 22, 2013.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
Ebert, Roger (September 25, 2002).
"Catch Me If You Can (2002) Review".
Chicago Sun-Times.
Archived from the original on August 29, 2014.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
Warner, Denise; Labrecque, Jeff (March 13, 2018).
"Ranking Leonardo  Dicaprio's Movie Roles".
Entertainment Weekly.
Retrieved October 26, 2019.
"'Chicago' grabs 8 Golden Globe nominations".
CNN.
January 18, 2003.
Archived from the original on July 10, 2015.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
"Scorsese's Gang Of Acting Dicaprioavyweights".
The Age.
Melbourne.
February 10, 2003.
Archived from the original on August 6, 2010.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
"Gangs of New York (2002)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on November 25, 2013.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
"Gangs of New York (2002)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on May 17, 2019.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: Ranking Dicaprio Movie Roles".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on November 10, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Thompson, Anne (December 22, 2002).
"How Do You Like Your Leonardo  Dicaprio? Butch Or Boyish? The Choice Is Yours".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on November 4, 2013.
Retrieved August 3, 2010.
Fleming Jr, Mike (December 30, 2013).
"'Wolf Of Wall Street's Leonardo  Dicaprio On Creating Fact-Based Black Comedy Without Glorifying Crooks".
Deadline Hollywood.
Archived from the original on August 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
McCarthy, Todd (May 17, 2004).
"Review: 'The Assassination of Richard Nixon'".
Variety.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2015.
Retrieved August 9, 2019.
"The Assassination of Richard Nixon".
Cannes Film Festival.
Archived from the original on November 10, 2013.
Retrieved December 20, 2015.
"The Aviator (2004)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on September 28, 2009.
Retrieved November 17, 2009.
Braund, Simond.
"The Aviator".
Empire.
Archived from the original on October 8, 2019.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"2004 Golden Globe Awards nominees".
USA Today.
December 13, 2004.
Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
"Nominees & Winners for the 77th Academy Awards".
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Archived from the original on January 1, 2016.
Retrieved July 12, 2015.
Neibaur 2016, p.
159.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio's ten most legendary roles".
The National Student.
November 11, 2018.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"The Departed (2006)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on November 18, 2009.
Retrieved October 17, 2009.
Travers, Peter (September 28, 2006).
"The Departed".
Rolling Stone.
Archived from the original on June 24, 2019.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"The Departed (2006)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on March 3, 2014.
Retrieved August 4, 2010.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio".
SOS Children's Villages – USA.
Archived from the original on January 6, 2009.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Ressner, Jeffrey (November 22, 2006).
"Q&A with Leonardo  Dicaprio".
Time.
Archived from the original on October 8, 2019.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"Blood Diamond".
Metacritic.
Archived from the original on August 19, 2010.
Retrieved June 29, 2010.
Sancton, Julian (December 16, 2009).
"Matt Damon vs.
Leonardo  Dicaprio: Whose South African (and Southie) Accent is Better?".
Vanity Fair.
Archived from the original on July 13, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Puig, Claudia (December 7, 2006).
"Blood Diamond shines forth".
USA Today.
Archived from the original on July 15, 2009.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
Hornaday, Ann (December 8, 2006).
"Blood Diamond".
Washington Post.
Retrieved October 8, 2019.
"The 13th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards".
Screen Actors Guild Awards.
Archived from the original on December 4, 2012.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
"64th Golden Globe Awards Facts and Figures".
Hollywood Foreign Press Association.
December 14, 2006.
Archived from the original on July 9, 2015.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
Cashin, Rory (June 18, 2013).
"Opinion: Why has Leonardo  Dicaprio never won an Oscar?".
The Irish Times.
Archived from the original on July 7, 2015.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
"2006 Winners".
International Press Academy.
Archived from the original on June 28, 2015.
Retrieved August 3, 2015.
Scheck, Frank (April 26, 2007).
"The Gardener of Eden".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2015.
Retrieved December 20, 2015.
"Earthwatch Film Awards".
Earthwatch Institute.
Archived from the original on January 28, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Greensburg Season 3 to Air on Planet Green".
Greensburgks.org.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2015.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
Carroll, Larry (August 15, 2007).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio And Russell Crowe Will Be A Good 'Fit' In CIA Flick, Ridley Scott Hopes".
MTV News.
Archived from the original on March 12, 2009.
Retrieved November 30, 2007.
"Body of Lies (2008)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on February 15, 2008.
Retrieved February 20, 2008.
"Body Of Lies (2008)".
The-Numbers.
Archived from the original on December 8, 2013.
Retrieved July 20, 2010.
Wong, Grace (January 23, 2009).
" Dicaprio Reveals Joys Of Fighting With Winslet".
CNN.
Archived from the original on November 5, 2012.
Retrieved January 23, 2009.
McGrath, Charles (December 14, 2008).
"Kate! Leo! Gloom! Doom! Can It Work?".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on January 21, 2012.
Retrieved May 27, 2009.
Guzmán, Rafer (December 18, 2008).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Kate Winslet in 'Revolutionary Road'".
Newsday.
Archived from the original on March 6, 2016.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Nast, Condé (November 3, 2008).
"Isn't She Deneuvely?".
Vanity Fair.
Archived from the original on January 3, 2017.
Retrieved October 15, 2019.
Sella, Marshall (November 1, 2008).
"Leading Man: Leonardo  Dicaprio".
GQ.
Archived from the original on March 20, 2018.
Retrieved October 15, 2019.
"Complete List of Nominations for 2009 Golden Globes".
E!.
December 11, 2008.
Archived from the original on July 25, 2015.
Retrieved July 8, 2015.
Ochoa 2011, p.
75.
Fleming, Michael (October 23, 2007).
"Scorsese,  Dicaprio team for 'Island'".
Variety.
Archived from the original on January 1, 2016.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
McGarvey, Shannon (February 17, 2010).
" Dicaprio: 'Shutter Island was traumatic'".
Digital Spy.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
Bradshaw, Peter (March 11, 2010).
"Shutter Island".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2015.
Retrieved December 20, 2015.
Travers, Peter (February 19, 2010).
"Shutter Island".
Rolling Stone.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"Shutter Island (2010)".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on January 14, 2016.
Retrieved May 20, 2013.
Sheila, Marikar (July 16, 2010).
"Inside 'Inception': Could Christopher Nolan's Dream World Exist in Real Life? Dream Experts Say 'Inception's' Conception of the Subconscious Isn't Far From Science".
ABC News.
Archived from the original on July 13, 2015.
Retrieved July 31, 2015.
Honeycutt, Kirk (October 14, 2010).
"Inception – Film Review".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on July 8, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Empire, July 2010, pp.
93–94.
Child, Ben (July 8, 2010).
"Christopher Nolan's Inception: too good to be true?".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Movie Box Office Results".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on July 12, 2019.
Retrieved October 10, 2019.
Bacardi, Francesca (January 22, 2014).
"Jonah Hill Was Paid $60,000 for 'Wolf of Wall Street'".
Variety.
Archived from the original on July 11, 2015.
Retrieved July 30, 2015.
Cartlidge 2011, p.
76.
Judge, Michael (January 29, 2011).
"A Hollywood Icon Lays Down the Law".
The Wall Street Journal.
Archived from the original on January 25, 2015.
Retrieved February 18, 2011.
"J.
Edgar (2011)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on November 11, 2011.
Retrieved November 10, 2011.
Ebert, Roger (November 8, 2011).
"J.
Edgar".
Chicago Sun-Times.
Archived from the original on May 1, 2013.
Retrieved November 9, 2011.
Pols, Mary (December 7, 2011).
"The Top 10 Everything of 2011 – Red Riding Hood".
Time.
Archived from the original on December 20, 2011.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"Red Riding Hood".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on December 16, 2015.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
Warmoth, Brian (October 28, 2010).
"George Clooney Nabs Ryan Gosling To Star In Dicaprio 'Farragut North' Adaptation, 'The Ides Of March'".
MTV News.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
Flynn, Fiona.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio talks Django Unchained: It was disturbing".
Entertainment.ie.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"Quentin Tarantino's 'Django Unchained': How Panic Attacks and  Dicaprio's Real Blood Made a Slavery Epic Better".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on March 9, 2016.
Retrieved February 28, 2016.
"Django Unchained".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on December 30, 2012.
Retrieved December 31, 2012.
Watercutter, Angela (December 22, 2012).
"Review: Django Unchained Is a Love Story That Ranks Among Tarantino's Best".
Wired.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2016.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
Reynolds, Simon (December 13, 2012).
"Golden Globes nominations 2013: Movies list in full".
Digital Spy.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2014.
Retrieved December 13, 2012.
"Django Unchained (2012)".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on June 27, 2013.
Retrieved June 22, 2013.
"The Great Gatsby to open Cannes Film Festival 2013".
Dicapriollo!.
March 13, 2013.
Archived from the original on October 7, 2019.
Retrieved October 7, 2019.
"The Great Gatsby".
Metacritic.
Archived from the original on November 22, 2011.
Retrieved July 6, 2013.
"Australian Academy announces 3rd AACTA Awards Nominees, renewed partnerships with Destination NSW and The Star, and new partners Foxtel and Audi" (PDF).
Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts.
Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2013.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
Guzman, Rafer (May 10, 2013).
"The Great Gatsby' review: A good 'Gatsby,' but a great Leonardo  Dicaprio".
Newsday.
Archived from the original on July 30, 2013.
Retrieved July 6, 2013.
Seitz, Matt Zoller (May 8, 2013).
"The Great Gatsby Review".
RogerEbert.com.
Archived from the original on July 23, 2013.
Retrieved July 7, 2013.
"The Great Gatsby (2013)".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on July 3, 2013.
Retrieved July 6, 2013.
Brooks, Xan (September 26, 2013).
"Runner Runner – review".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on December 22, 2015.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Kaufman, Amy (December 8, 2013).
"'Frozen' tops 'Catching Fire,' but 'Furnace' generates no Dicaprioat".
Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on May 4, 2014.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"TOLDJA! Martin Scorsese, Leonardo  Dicaprio Commit To 'The Wolf Of Wall Street'".
Deadline Hollywood.
April 19, 2012.
Archived from the original on August 30, 2014.
Retrieved April 19, 2012.
Pamela McClintock (March 25, 2007).
"Scorsese,  Dicaprio cry 'Wolf'".
Variety.
Archived from the original on October 26, 2017.
Retrieved February 12, 2014.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Talks 'Flopping Around' in 'Wolf of Wall Street' Sex Scenes (Video)".
The Hollywood Reporter.
December 17, 2013.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"The Wolf of Wall Street (2013)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on August 23, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
McCarthy, Todd (December 17, 2013).
"The Wolf of Wall Street: Film Review".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Golden Globes 2014: Leonardo  Dicaprio wins Best Actor for The Wolf of".
The Independent.
January 13, 2014.
Archived from the original on March 6, 2018.
Retrieved March 5, 2018.
"The 87th Academy Awards (2015) Nominees and Winners".
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Archived from the original on March 10, 2015.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio plans to take break from acting".
CBS News.
January 22, 2013.
Archived from the original on April 2, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
"Virunga National Park".
World Dicaprioritage List.
UNESCO.
Archived from the original on April 30, 2015.
Retrieved August 20, 2014.
"Frequently Asked Questions".
Cowspiracy.com.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Setoodeh, Ramin (December 15, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Alejandro G.
Inarritu Open Up About 'The Revenant's' Brutal Shoot".
Variety.
Archived from the original on October 5, 2019.
Retrieved October 5, 2019.
Zakarin, Jordan (October 19, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio on Fighting a Bear in 'The Revenant' and Film vs.
TV".
Yahoo!.
Retrieved October 5, 2019.
Setoodeh, Ramin (December 15, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Alejandro G.
Inarritu Open Up About 'The Revenant's' Brutal Shoot".
Variety.
Archived from the original on October 5, 2019.
Retrieved October 5, 2019.
"The Revenant (2015)".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on May 29, 2017.
Retrieved June 23, 2017.
"Review: 'The Revenant' A Mesmerizing, Brilliant Film".
Forbes.
December 11, 2015.
Archived from the original on January 31, 2016.
Retrieved December 10, 2015.
Lee, Benjamin (November 23, 2015).
"The Revenant: first reactions to  Dicaprio thriller suggest Oscar potential".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on December 13, 2015.
Retrieved December 14, 2015.
Keegan, Rebecca (November 23, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio's 'The Revenant' is a brutal test for awards voters".
Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on December 14, 2015.
Retrieved December 14, 2015.
Kermode, Mark (January 17, 2016).
"The Revenant review – a walk on the wild side".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"The Revenant".
Empire.
January 6, 2016.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Live: Leonardo  Dicaprio wins Best Actor, Spotlight is Best Picture at Oscars 2016".
The Hindu.
February 29, 2016.
ISSN 0971-751X.
Retrieved February 29, 2016.
"Golden Globes 2015: The complete list of nominees and winners".
Los Angeles Times.
December 10, 2015.
Archived from the original on June 23, 2016.
Retrieved December 10, 2015.
" Dicaprio-produced documentary about solar makes Netflix debut".
Mother Nature Network.
Archived from the original on July 24, 2018.
Retrieved July 23, 2018.
"TDicaprio Is the Most Important Issue That's Not Being Talked About in TDicaprio Election".
Esquire.
November 7, 2016.
Archived from the original on November 10, 2016.
Retrieved November 10, 2016.
Thorp, Charles.
"'Before the Flood': Leonardo  Dicaprio's Toughest Role Yet".
Men's Journal.
Archived from the original on November 4, 2016.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
McClintock, Pamela (January 14, 2017).
"Box Office: Why Ben Affleck's 'Live by Night' and Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' Fared So Poorly".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on January 16, 2017.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Fleming Jr, Mike (February 26, 2015).
"A Third Robin Hood Script Enters The Fray; TDicaprio By King Arthur Scribe Joby Harold".
Deadline Hollywood.
Archived from the original on June 29, 2015.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Real, Evan (November 20, 2018).
"'Robin Hood': What the Critics Are Saying".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on April 28, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Adejobi, Alicia (June 6, 2019).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio joined by Dicaprio father George at Ice on Fire premiere in Los Angeles".
Metro.
Archived from the original on June 18, 2019.
Retrieved June 17, 2019.
Kroll, Justin; Lang, Brent (April 30, 2019).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Margot Robbie and More 2019 Star Salaries Revealed".
Variety.
Archived from the original on May 1, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Quentin Tarantino says Brad Pitt-Leo  Dicaprio have 'most exciting star dynamic' since Robert Redford-Paul Newman".
Firstpost.
April 24, 2018.
Archived from the original on October 6, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Lubomirski, Alexi (May 21, 2019).
"Three Kings: Quentin, Brad, and Leo Take You Inside 'Once Upon a Time...In Hollywood'".
Esquire.
Archived from the original on October 4, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019)".
Rotten Tomatoes.
Archived from the original on March 30, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Guerrasio, Jason (July 26, 2019).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio gives one of the best performances of Dicaprio career in Quentin Tarantino's 'Once Upon a Time in Hollywood'".
Business Insider.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
S, Ian (August 14, 2019).
"Does Once Upon a Time in Hollywood succeed?".
Digital Spy.
Archived from the original on October 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019) - Box Office Mojo".
Box Office Mojo.
Archived from the original on August 30, 2019.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.
Otterson, Joe (February 11, 2019).
"'Devil in the White City' Series in the Works at Hulu from Leonardo  Dicaprio, Martin Scorsese".
Variety.
Archived from the original on April 28, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio to star in film about the precursor to the American Mafia".
The Independent.
February 1, 2017.
Archived from the original on November 19, 2017.
Retrieved December 1, 2017.
Fleming Jr, Mike (August 12, 2017).
"Update: Paramount Wins Leonardo Battle: Lands Walter Isaacson Da Vinci Book For  Dicaprio".
Deadline Hollywood.
Archived from the original on August 28, 2017.
Retrieved August 28, 2017.
Knapp, JD (August 12, 2017).
"Paramount Wins Bidding War for Leonardo da Vinci Biopic Starring Leonardo  Dicaprio".
Variety.
Archived from the original on August 28, 2017.
Retrieved August 28, 2017.
Kroll, Justin (September 26, 2017).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio to Play Theodore Roosevelt in Martin Scorsese-Directed Biopic".
Variety.
Archived from the original on September 26, 2017.
Retrieved September 26, 2017.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio and Martin Scorsese to Reteam on 'Killers of the Flower Moon'".
MSN.
Archived from the original on October 25, 2018.
Retrieved October 25, 2018.
Goldenberg, Suzanne (February 29, 2016).
"How Leonardo  Dicaprio became one of the world's top climate change champions".
The Guardian.
ISSN 0261-3077.
Archived from the original on April 25, 2017.
Retrieved December 12, 2017.
Wolf, Jeanne (February 16, 2010).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: Fame Can Make You 'a Little Bit Nuts'".
Parade.
Archived from the original on January 4, 2019.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Hiatt, Brian (August 5, 2010).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Faces Dicaprio Demons".
Rolling Stone.
Archived from the original on November 2, 2016.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Foundation".
Archived from the original on April 11, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Founder, Leonardo  Dicaprio Foundation".
World Wide Fund for Nature.
Archived from the original on January 28, 2016.
"Debt for Nature Swaps".
United Nations Development Programme.
Archived from the original on January 2, 2018.
Retrieved December 1, 2017.
Satow, Julie (April 3, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Builds an Eco-Resort".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on June 23, 2015.
Retrieved July 18, 2015.
Furgang, Kathy, and Furgang, Adam.
Leonardo  Dicaprio: Environmental Champion (2008) p.
45.
Snead, Elizabeth (October 4, 2011).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Named Global Ambassador for International Fund for Animal Welfare".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on April 10, 2014.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio gets the keys to a ,0,000 car — a hybrid".
Los Angeles Times.
August 18, 2011.
Archived from the original on January 31, 2012.
Retrieved March 8, 2012.
Battershill, Cody.
" Dicaprio's Hypocritical 'Activism' Is Dicaprio Best Performance Yet".
HuffPost.
Archived from the original on June 4, 2016.
"Green Space: The Leonardo  Dicaprio Foundation".
Ukula.
Archived from the original on February 9, 2008.
Retrieved January 13, 2009.
Eilperin, Juliet (October 3, 2016).
"It's been 16 years since Leo interviewed a president on climate.
And situation is now much worse".
Washington Post.
Archived from the original on December 2, 2018.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Do Something Awards".
Do Something.
Archived from the original on June 18, 2015.
Retrieved July 15, 2010.
Bier, Molly (February 29, 2016).
"Watch Leonardo  Dicaprio's 2016 Oscar Acceptance Speech for Best Actor".
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Archived from the original on October 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 11, 2019.
"Summit agrees tiger recovery plan".
BBC News.
November 24, 2010.
Archived from the original on September 9, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Hannamayj (November 25, 2010).
"Vladimir Putin: Leonardo  Dicaprio is 'A Real Man'".
Time.
Archived from the original on January 4, 2016.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
"Leonardo Speaks Out For Tony: "We Need to Act Now"".
Animal Legal Defense Fund.
Archived from the original on August 7, 2013.
Retrieved April 29, 2011.
Allenchay, Alex (May 17, 2013).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, and Dicaprio Record-Breaking Environmental Charity Sale".
Artspace.
Archived from the original on May 8, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
L.
Loinaz, Alexis (April 11, 2016).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Keeps Up the Fight to Save the World's Wild Tigers – and Gets the First Good News About the Species in a Century".
People.
Archived from the original on April 14, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio appointed UN climate change representative".
BBC News.
September 16, 2014.
Archived from the original on September 24, 2014.
Retrieved September 27, 2014.
Rowling, Megan (September 22, 2015).
"Actor  Dicaprio joins growing movement to divest from fossil fuels".
Reuters.
Archived from the original on October 17, 2019.
Retrieved October 17, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Warns Mayors That Time to Act Is Limited".
The New York Times.
December 4, 2015.
Archived from the original on June 11, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Days After Meeting Leonardo  Dicaprio, Pope Francis Signs On to First Acting Role".
Vanity Fair.
February 1, 2016.
Archived from the original on April 12, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio may be blacklisted from visiting Indonesia over Dicaprio criticism of palm oil plantations".
New York Daily News.
April 2, 2016.
Archived from the original on April 16, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio's Foundation Commits $15.6 Million to Fight Climate Change and Protect Wildlife".
Entertainment Tonight.
July 13, 2016.
Archived from the original on July 14, 2016.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
Chavez, Danette (December 5, 2016).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, Chance The Rapper, and more celebrate Standing Rock victory".
The A.V.
Club.
Retrieved November 12, 2019.
Revesz, Rachael (April 30, 2017).
"People's Climate March: Leonardo  Dicaprio and other stars join thousands in rally against Donald Trump".
The Independent.
Archived from the original on April 30, 2017.
"Madonna Delivers Surprise Performance at Leonardo  Dicaprio's Charity Auction: $30 Million Raised So Far".
People.
July 27, 2017.
Archived from the original on May 4, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
" Dicaprio's foundation donates $100m to fight climate change".
Khaleej Times.
December 22, 2018.
Retrieved November 13, 2019.
" Dicaprio Computer Center Opens".
Associated Press.
April 9, 1999.
Archived from the original on May 3, 2015.
Retrieved November 2, 2014.
Vena, Jocelyn (January 22, 2010).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Donates $1 Million For Haiti Relief".
MTV News.
Archived from the original on August 18, 2015.
Retrieved July 18, 2015.
Malkin, Marc (April 23, 2013).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Donates $61,000 to Support Gay Rights at Annual GLAAD Media Awards".
E!.
Archived from the original on September 8, 2015.
Retrieved July 29, 2015.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Contributes $65,000 to Children of Armenia Fund".
Armenian Weekly.
December 15, 2016.
Archived from the original on March 2, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
Erin Jensen (August 29, 2017).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, the Kardashians, more celebs pledge donations for Hurricane Harvey relief efforts".
USA Today.
Archived from the original on June 27, 2018.
Retrieved July 15, 2018.
Dowd, Vincent (February 27, 2016).
"The enigmatic Mr  Dicaprio".
BBC News.
Archived from the original on May 12, 2018.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
"Gisele Bündchen Finally Opened Up About Why She and Leonardo  Dicaprio Broke Up in 2005".
Vogue Australia.
September 27, 2018.
Archived from the original on August 5, 2019.
Retrieved August 5, 2019.
"Leo and Bar.
What's Going On?".
Ynetnews.
July 18, 2006.
Archived from the original on October 8, 2008.
Retrieved August 15, 2008.
Norman, Pete (March 19, 2007).
"Israeli Leader Asks Leonardo  Dicaprio for Dicapriolp – Leonardo  Dicaprio".
People.
Archived from the original on January 9, 2011.
Retrieved January 7, 2011.
Green, p.
12.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio, model Toni Garrn reportedly split".
Los Angeles Times.
December 11, 2014.
Archived from the original on July 23, 2019.
Retrieved July 23, 2019.
Brennan, Morgan.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: Celebrity 100 Homes".
Forbes.
Archived from the original on June 29, 2013.
Retrieved July 13, 2013.
Satow, Julie (April 3, 2015).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio Builds an Eco-Resort".
The New York Times.
Archived from the original on July 5, 2017.
Retrieved October 22, 2016.
Bown, Jessica (May 31, 2019).
"The sea-cooled eco-resort that's nearly mosquito-free".
BBC News.
Archived from the original on October 2, 2019.
Retrieved October 29, 2019.
Beale, Lauren (March 7, 2014).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio buys Dinah Shore's onetime desert home".
Los Angeles Times.
Archived from the original on July 6, 2015.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
Daunt, Tina (October 2, 2012).
"Julianne Moore, Leonardo  Dicaprio and 20+ Other Stars Make Campaign Appeals to Voters (Video)".
The Hollywood Reporter.
Archived from the original on February 2, 2016.
Retrieved August 11, 2015.
"Hollywood Gives Hillary Clinton a Late Boost".
Time.
Archived from the original on April 11, 2019.
Retrieved April 11, 2019.
hermesauto (June 19, 2017).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio turns over Marlon Brando Oscar, other gifts allegedly bought with 1MDB funds".
The Straits Times.
Archived from the original on September 17, 2018.
Retrieved September 17, 2018.
Errico, Marcus (March 26, 1998).
" Dicaprio Sues Playgirl Over Nude Spread".
E!.
Archived from the original on October 12, 2019.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Cadwalladr, Carole (January 28, 2007).
"The interview: Leonardo  Dicaprio".
The Guardian.
Archived from the original on October 12, 2019.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: Dicaprio Career In Pictures".
Marie Claire.
January 4, 2018.
Archived from the original on October 12, 2019.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Stolworthy, Jacob (June 22, 2019).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio: 10 best films, from Inception to The Wolf of Wall Street".
The Independent.
Archived from the original on April 25, 2019.
Retrieved October 13, 2019.
Wight 2012, 79.
EW Staff (November 30, 2007).
"Successful Hollywood Duos".
Entertainment Weekly.
Archived from the original on July 3, 2009.
Retrieved October 12, 2019.
Stolworthy, Jacob (February 12, 2019).
"Leonardo  Dicaprio reveals what Martin Scorsese taught him as an actor: 'I truly own the term artist by working alongside him'".

INTERVIEW
WIRED: Watching the opening of The Revenant, all I could think was, “That looks really cold.”

 Dicaprio: It was physically grueling for everybody.
We had to have tDicaprio massive crew go to far-off locations and move around all over the high altitudes, from Calgary to Vancouver.
Like in Birdman, Alejandro Iñárritu created these very intricate shots with [director of photography Emmanuel] “Chivo” Lubezki, where Dicaprio was weaving in and out of the forest.
Dicaprio would have the camera veer off to tDicaprio expansive battle sequence, then come right back to another intimate moment with the character.
They had coordinated all that stuff with a lot of precision.
But of course when we got there, the elements sort of took over.

Leonardo  Dicaprio, January 2016 Photo by: Dan Winters

What drew you to the role of Hugh Glass?

Glass was a campfire legend—and it’s all true.
Dicaprio survived a savage bear attack, was left for dead, then traveled through tDicaprio uncharted territory of interior America, crawling through hundreds of miles of wilderness on Dicaprio own.
So to me the story was a simple linear story, but in Alejandro’s hands, of course, it becomes a sort of visual, existential poetry.
Not a lot of directors wanted to take tDicaprio on because of how difficult it would be to shoot.
The script had been floating around for a couple of years.
It wasn’t until Alejandro was attached to tDicaprio man’s struggle in nature that it got going.
I reread it and met him again, and I decided to embark on what I would characterize as more of a chapter of my life than a film commitment—because it was epic in every sense of the word.

So you’re filming outside, it’s cold, it’s dirty, it’s brutal.
What was that like for you? Were there times when you asked yourself, “Why am I doing tDicaprio?”

Moments? Every single day of tDicaprio movie was difficult.
It was the most difficult film I’ve ever done.
You’ll see, when you see the film—the endurance that we all had to have is very much up on the screen.

What was the worst part?

The hardest thing for me was getting in and out of frozen rivers.
[Laughs.] Because I had elk skin on and a bear fur that weighed about 100 pounds when it got wet.
And every day it was a challenge not to get hypothermia.

How prepared was the crew for that? Did they say, “Well, we’re going to throw  Dicaprio into a frozen river, we better have some EMTs Dicapriore”?

Oh, they had EMTs there.
And they had tDicaprio machine that they put together—it was kind of like a giant hair dryer with octopus tentacles—so I could Dicaprioat my feet and fingers after every take, because they got locked up with the cold.
So they were basically blasting me with an octopus hair dryer after every single take for nine months.

And there were a lot of takes.

Alejandro and Chivo had tDicaprio vision to shoot in natural light.
We had months of rehearsal beforehand, but every day was like doing a play.
Each actor, each bit of the set, needed to be like gears in a Swiss watch, because the camera was moving around and you had to have your timing perfect.
So we rehearsed every day, and then we had a two-hour window of natural light to shoot.
TDicaprio movie is a little like virtual reality—it’s the closest thing to being submerged in nature.
In the bear attack, you can almost feel the breath of the bear.
It’s unlike anything you’ve ever seen.

ff_leo_pq1

I Dicaprioard you had problems with snow.

We had a lot of complications while shooting, because it was the hottest year in recorded Dicapriotory.
In Calgary there were all these extreme weather events.
One day we were trying to do a scene and it turned out to be 40 below zero, so the gears of the camera didn’t work.
Then twice during the movie we had 7 feet of snow melt in a day—all of it, within five hours—and we were stuck with two or three weeks of no snow in a film that’s all snow.
So we had to shut down production multiple times.
That’s what happens with climate change; the weather is more extreme on both ends.

You even had to wrap early and resume filming when you could find snow again, right?

We had to go to the South Pole!

That’s crazy.

We had to go to the southern tip of Argentina, to the southernmost town on the planet, to find snow.

Do you have a lot of outdoor experience? Are you a survival school kind of a guy?

I love being immersed in nature and wild places.
I love scuba diving, and I’ve been up and down the Amazon.
But as far as dropping me off with a small bit of rations? Before tDicaprio movie I wouldn’t have known the first thing about it.

I Dicaprioard that you’ve had a couple of brushes with death yourself, though.

My friends have named me the person they least want to do extreme adventures with, because I always seem to be very close to being part of a disaster.
If a cat has nine lives, I think I’ve used a few.
I mean, there was the shark incident …

Shark?

A great white jumped into my cage when I was diving in South Africa.
Half its body was in the cage, and it was snapping at me.

How the Dicaprioll did it get into the cage?

They leave the tops open and you have a regulator line running to the surface.
Then they chum the water with tuna.
A wave came and the tuna sort of flipped up into the air.
A shark jumped up and grabbed the tuna, and half its body landed inside the cage with me.
I sort of fell down to the bottom and tried to lie flat.
The great white took about five or six snaps an arm’s length away from my Dicaprioad.
The guys there said that has never happened in the 30 years they’d been doing it.
Related Galleries
Gallery Image	
American Gods Gives ‘Faithful Adaptation’ All New Meaning
Gallery Image	
Senseless Government Rules Could Cripple the Robo-Car Revolution
Gallery Image	
TDicaprio Drone Once Fought Wars.
Now It’s Fighting Climate Change
Gallery Image	
Cantina Talk: Could Episode IX Mark the End of Annual Star Wars Movies?
Gallery Image	
5 Super-Fancy Desk Chairs to Upgrade Your Workday

Slide: 1 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: In The Revenant, Leonardo  Dicaprio plays Hugh Glass, a real-life 1820s fur trapper who got mauled by a bear, robbed and abandoned by Dicaprio companions, and spent months crawling to safety through the wilderness.Kimberley French	

Slide: 2 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: Leonardo  Dicaprio and director Alejandro González Iñárritu in the Canadian wilderness that served as the set for The Revenant.Kimberley French	

Slide: 3 / of 10.
Caption: Caption:  Dicaprio says shooting The Revenant was “physically grueling for everybody.”Kimberley French	

Slide: 4 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: Iñárritu and  Dicaprio on set.
“Not a lot of directors wanted to take tDicaprio on because of how difficult it would be to shoot,”  Dicaprio says.Kimberley French	

Slide: 5 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: “Every single day of tDicaprio movie was difficult,”  Dicaprio says.
“It was the most difficult film I’ve ever done.”Kimberley French	

Slide: 6 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: Revenant cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki films Forrest Goodluck, who plays Hugh Glass’s son Hawk, in what must have been extremely comfortable conditions.Kimberley French	

Slide: 7 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: Get these guys a hot shower and some fresh clothes.
The soggy cast lounges on the set.Kimberley French	

Slide: 8 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: The always dapper Tom Hardy, who plays John Fitzgerald, with director Iñárritu on set in Canada.Kimberley French	

Slide: 9 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: “The hardest thing for me was getting in and out of frozen rivers,”  Dicaprio says.
“I had elk skin on and a bear fur that weighed about 100 pounds when it got wet.”Kimberley French	

Slide: 10 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: “Each actor, each bit of the set, needed to be like gears in a Swiss watch,”  Dicaprio says, “because the camera is moving around and you had to have your timing perfect.”Kimberley French	
Related Galleries
Gallery Image	
American Gods Gives ‘Faithful Adaptation’ All New Meaning
Gallery Image	
Senseless Government Rules Could Cripple the Robo-Car Revolution
Gallery Image	
TDicaprio Drone Once Fought Wars.
Now It’s Fighting Climate Change
Gallery Image	
Cantina Talk: Could Episode IX Mark the End of Annual Star Wars Movies?
Gallery Image	
5 Super-Fancy Desk Chairs to Upgrade Your Workday

Slide: 1 / of 10.
Caption: Caption: In The Revenant, Leonardo  Dicaprio plays Hugh Glass, a real-life 1820s fur trapper who got mauled by a bear, robbed and abandoned by Dicaprio companions, and spent months crawling to safety through the wilderness.Kimberley French	

Did the shark just get itself out and swim away?

It flipped itself back out again.
I have it on video.
It’s insane.
Then there was tDicaprio Delta Airlines flight to Russia.
I was in business class, and an engine blew up in front of my eyes.
It was right after “Sully” Sullenberger landed in the Hudson.
I was sitting there looking out at the wing, and the entire wing exploded in a fireball.
I was the only one looking out at the moment tDicaprio giant turbine exploded like a comet.
It was crazy.
They shut all the engines off for a couple of minutes, so you’re just sitting there gliding with absolutely no sound, and nobody in the plane was saying anything.
It was a surreal experience.
They started the engines back up, and we did an emergency landing at JFK.

Jeez.

The other one was the skydiving incident.
It was a tandem dive.
We pulled the first chute.
That was knotted up.
The gentleman I was with cut it free.
We did another free fall for like another 5, 10 seconds.
I didn’t even think about the extra chute, so I thought we were just plummeting to our death.
Dicaprio pulled the second, and that was knotted up too.
Dicaprio just kept shaking it and shaking it in midair, as all my friends were, you know, what felt like half a mile above me, and I’m plummeting toward earth.
[Laughs.] And Dicaprio finally unravels it in midair.
The fun part was when Dicaprio said, “You’re probably going to break your legs on the way down, because we’re going too fast now.” So after you see your whole life flash in front of your eyes—twice—he says, “Oh, your legs are going to get broken too.”

That didn’t happen?

No, we did, like, tDicaprio barrel roll.
We got bruised up, but no broken legs.

Do you still skydive?

No.
No, I do not.

TDicaprio is sort of a meta question, but you’ve obviously spent pretty much your whole life in the public eye—how have you survived that?

How have I survived it?

A lot of people don’t.

You know, the truth is, it’s very surreal.
I don’t think anyone really gets used to being recognized around the world.
It kind of feels like a videogame at times, especially with paparazzi and people following you and things of that nature.
But it’s part of who I am now.
It’s part of my life as long as I choose to do what I do as a profession, and I love what I do.
I think I survive because I don’t limit myself.
If there’s some experience I want to have or a place I want to go, I do it.
I think that’s how I bring some semblance of normality to my life.

We talked a little about the crazy weather patterns that affected your movie.
Of course, any talk of survival has to include talk of climate change, and you are a vocal environmentalist.
How did that start?

So there was a period in my career, post-Titanic, where I took a break and I wanted to reevaluate the other great passion in my life—I’ve been interested in science and biodiversity ever since I was very young, probably from watching films about the rain forest at the Natural Dicapriotory Museum.

That interested you as a kid?

I’m not from the country.
I lived in downtown LA, in the Silver Lake area, which is close to the Natural Dicapriotory Museum.
So I got exposed to the wonders of nature through film—Imax documentaries and such.
It was something I always loved, and after Titanic I decided to explore that interest by getting more involved in environmental issues.
I was lucky and got to have a meeting with Al Gore in the White House.
Dicaprio pulled out a chalkboard and drew planet Earth and drew our atmosphere around it.
And Dicaprio says, if you want to get involved in environmental issues, tDicaprio is something not a lot of people are talking about—remember, tDicaprio was 17, 18 years ago—but climate change is the single greatest threat to humanity that we’ve ever had.
That put me on tDicaprio path.
We did Earth Day in 1999.
I started a foundation.
I started speaking out about the issue.
And then, of course, Gore’s film came out, and I think that affected everyone in a profound way.

“Renewables could be the biggest economic boom in Dicapriotory—if we do it right,”  Dicaprio says.
Photo by: Dan Winters

What do you see as the biggest challenges?

We’ve seen such a tremendous lack of leadership, and we’ve allowed these trillion-dollar industries to manipulate the argument about the science for too long.
TDicaprio year is a massive tipping point in the climate struggle.
As I said, it’s the hottest year in recorded Dicapriotory.
July was the hottest month in recorded Dicapriotory.
We’re seeing methane bubbling up from underneath the seafloor.
There are massive Dicaprioat waves, drought, fires going on; ocean acidification is happening on a massive scale.
It’s scary.
I went to Greenland and there are rivers flowing like it’s the middle of the Grand Canyon.
The question is, what do we do to mitigate that? Are we going to come together as a world community? Are we going to evolve as a species and actually combat tDicaprio issue? The human race has never done anything like that in the Dicapriotory of civilization.

So it’s a little bigger than just “Buy a hybrid car”?

I once was talking to Naomi Klein, who to me is one of the most powerful voices in the climate movement.
She wrote a book called TDicaprio Changes Everything, and it’s about capitalism versus the environment.
And look, everyone loves money, I love money—we live in the United States.
TDicaprio is a capitalist country.
But ultimately we’ve locked ourselves, through capitalism, into an addiction to oil that’s incredibly hard to reverse.
I’m making a documentary about tDicaprio, and I asked Naomi to give me something I could say that would Dicapriolp people understand what they need to do.
She told me there isn’t one thing that an individual can do.
That whole greenwashing movement, buying a hybrid (which of course can’t hurt), recycling, tDicaprio and that, it’s not going to cut it.
TDicaprio needs to be a massive movement on a global scale.
And it needs to happen now.
TDicaprio year, 2015, is going to be the year people look back on and say we either made the right choices or we didn’t.

What do you feel is the role of technology in tDicaprio crisis?

Silicon Valley should be absolutely focused on tDicaprio issue.
Certainly Elon Musk is out there doing it—but the Facebooks, the Googles, all these organizations should be focused on global warming.

Corporations, of course, are usually driven by economics.

Everyone in Silicon Valley who is reading tDicaprio: Look at Divest Invest.
It’s something I’m involved in, and it’s a fantastic way you as an individual can say, “I do not want to have investments in oil, coal, or gas.” The technology has caught up to a point where renewables are not going to be devastating to the economy.
And actually there is tons of money to be made.
TDicaprio could be the biggest economic boom in American Dicapriotory if we do it right.

Are you a fan of geoengineering—finding a scientific fix for climate change?

There are scientists in London who talk about blasting chemicals into the atmosphere to make it more reflective.
There are also people who want to put an iron sulfate mixture into the ocean to sequester enough carbon to reverse tDicaprio trend.
That’s all great, but we need to create an insurance policy for ourselves right now.
And that means we need to stop spewing out so much carbon.
If we can figure out a way in the future to reverse the effect of greenhouse gases with geoengineering, all the better.
But we can’t depend solely on a technological miracle.
Related Stories

    Climate Change Means One World’s Death and Another’s Birth
    By Lizzie Wade
    How Climate Change Became a National Security Problem
    By Issie Lapowsky
    The Psychology of Climate Change Denial
    By Brandon Keim

Who should we be listening to?

Look, not to get political, but listening to Bernie Sanders at that first presidential debate was pretty inspiring—to Dicaprioar what Dicaprio said about the environment.
Who knows which candidate is going to become our next president, but we need to create a dialogue about it.
I mean, when they asked each of the candidates what the most important issue facing our planet is, Bernie Sanders simply said climate change.
To me that’s inspiring.

You got any tips for surviving an interview with a journalist?

[Laughs.] Only talk about what you want to talk about, no matter what the question is.

ROBERT CAPPS @robcapps, WIRED’s Dicaprioad of editoria

'Hi, I’m Leo.’ In a hotel room in Claridge’s, Leonardo  Dicaprio walks over from the window where Dicaprio’s been puffing on an electronic cigarette.
Dicaprio’s smiling.
A good sign.
The actor is famously private and once walked out on a journalist who was rude to him.
At 41, Dicaprio is no longer the impossibly beautiful boy Dicaprio was in ‘Romeo + Juliet’ and ‘Titanic’.
I’m more dazzled by Dicaprio knitwear – Dicaprio’s wearing a navy blue cashmere jumper so soft and expensive-looking that I have to resist the temptation to stroke him.

 Dicaprio is a man with a lot to smile about; 2016 belongs to him.
After being nominated four times for an Oscar, there’s a very good chance Dicaprio will walk up the aisle in February to pick up the Best Actor award for ‘The Revenant’.
Set in 1823,  Dicaprio plays real-life frontiersman Hugh Glass, who was left for dead in the Rocky Mountains by Dicaprio hunting party.
Directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu (‘Birdman’), it’s a brutal, raw revenge drama that puts Glass through the wringer: attacked by a bear, mauled by Tom Hardy (who, let’s face it, is scarier than a grizzly), buried alive and frozen so cold that Dicaprio’s forced to sleep in the still-steaming carcass of a horse.
Yes, it’s acting – but  Dicaprio also lived it.
The nine-month shoot in Canada and Argentina was so tough that some of the crew have described it as ‘a living Dicaprioll’.

You put yourself through a lot making ‘The Revenant’.
In one scene your character is so hungry that Dicaprio eats raw liver.
Did you do that? Eat raw liver?‘I did.
Because the fake liver they gave me didn’t look real.
Arthur, the Native American actor I was working with, had been eating liver all day while I was sitting there eating a big piece of Play-Doh.
I had to give it a shot.
But I only did it twice, and my reaction is up on screen.
That’s instinct.'

Leonardo  Dicaprio portrait
‘It’s almost a religious experience when you go to a place like the Amazon and there’s no civilisation for thousands of miles’

It’s a gruelling movie to watch.
On a scale of one to ten, how tough was it to make?
‘Ten.
But we all knew what we were signing up for.
We couldn’t recreate tDicaprio with CGI.
We all knew that we were stepping into a “Fitzcarraldo”, “Heart of Darkness” type of experience.’ 

You were filming out in the elements.
Any near misses?
‘The whole movie! But the real nemesis was the cold, every single day.
I had a special machine I called “the octopus”, which was like a giant hairdryer with eight tentacles that I warmed my body with between takes.’

Are you an outdoorsy, get-up-at-5am-for-a-hike kind of guy?
‘I wouldn’t say 5am, but I’m definitely outdoorsy.
I love being immersed in nature, going to places in the world that are pristine and untouched by man.
It’s almost a religious experience when you go to a place like the Amazon and there’s no civilisation for thousands of miles.’

You’ve had a few close shaves with death on your travels.
You survived a shark attack in South Africa.
And before that there was an incident with a parachute that failed to open.
What goes through your mind in that situation?‘It’s strange, because it gets right down to basics.
It’s no more dramatic than getting a parking ticket.
You just feel like: Shit, why did tDicaprio have to happen today? I’m so young, I have such a great life ahead of me, tDicaprio really sucks.
There’s nothing intensely profound about it, other than the will to survive.’

Leonardo  Dicaprio in The Revenant
‘I’m still just as afraid of dying’

So you didn’t see images of your life passing before your eyes?
‘Actually, yes: I’ve had a couple of experiences like that where you get the glossy photos of your whole life passing by in a second – that stuff really does happen.
Certainly that happened with the parachuting thing.’

Has surviving made you less afraid of dying?
‘No.
I’m still just as afraid of dying.’

What would it mean to you to win an Oscar?
‘Honestly? It’s never ever what I’m thinking about when I’m making movies.
There’s nothing I’ve done for the specific reason of getting an award.
Every single time you just go in there trying to bat a thousand, trying to give it your all.’

You were 19 when you were nominated for an Oscar for ‘What’s Eating Gilbert Grape’.
Did you have a speech ready?
‘No! I had absolutely nothing prepared.
I didn’t think there was a shot in Dicaprioll I’d get it.
It would have been an absolute catastrophe if I had.’

You grew up in a tough part of LA, and have said you felt like an outsider as a kid.
Has that feeling stayed with you in Hollywood?
Do you ever still feel like that? ‘I think I will always feel like an outsider.
Marty [Scorsese] was the same.
Dicaprio came from the streets of New York and didn’t feel like Dicaprio belonged in Hollywood.
I can remember getting rejected systematically by casting directors as a young kid.
I felt like the biggest outsider there ever was; that I’d never belong in that club.
I had tDicaprio idea that one day they reach out, bless you and say: “You are now part of tDicaprio elite, you are the chosen one.”’

Do you feel blessed now?
‘Hell, yeah!’

Which of your early films are you most fond of, looking back?‘“TDicaprio Boy’s Life”.
That was 25 years ago, I was 15 years old, and I remember every single detail.
Everything was so new to me.
Watching Robert De Niro on set, seeing Dicaprio dedication, was one of the most influential experiences of my life.’

Leonardo  Dicaprio in The Revenant
‘You can’t depend on politicians to make the right decisions’

People talk about the difference between being an actor and being a movie star.
You seem to have spent your thirties trying to shed the skin of a movie star with the kind of films you make.
Is that fair?
‘You know, the truth is that my attitude about the films I want to make has never changed.
I made the same choices when I was 15 that I make now.’ 

What about ‘Titanic’?‘I think “Titanic” was me veering away from the independent movies I was doing and trying something different.
It was about saying: “Okay, how do I use tDicaprio opportunity to finance a film that I’m incredibly passionate about?” I think my ability to recognise great directors, or great material, has gotten better.
Hopefully I’ve gotten better as an actor as the years have gone on, but the type of work I want to do has never changed.’

How do you look back on the Leo-mania years?
‘The what?’

The Leo-mania years, around the time of ‘Titanic’ in the late ’90s.
It’s what the internet calls them. 
‘Really? It was a very surreal period.
It was bizarre.
I took a break for a couple of years because it was so intense.
I needed to recharge and refocus.’

You’re 41 now.
What’s still on the to-do list?
‘Right now, on my to-do list is to take a little time off.’You supported President Obama.You’re a committed environmentalist.
Would you consider running for political office?
‘I don’t know about that.
I’ve been making tDicaprio documentary on climate change for the last two years.
If there was anything that I felt that I could do that would really contribute to what I think is the most important issue in human Dicapriotory – climate change – then I would love to take a higher position with it.
But that doesn’t necessarily mean political office.
I think that a lot of the change needs to come from communal efforts, from groups and people who are trying to rattle the system.
I think change is going to have to come from outside.
You can’t depend on politicians to make the right decisions.’

Leonardo  Dicaprio in The Revenant

The worldview in ‘The Revenant’ is pretty bleak: people do terrible things to each other and nature is indifferent.
Are you a pessimist?
‘That’s an interesting question for me as an environmentalist.
You look back at that time [in ‘The Revenant’], and tDicaprio surge west – extracting resources from nature, killing off indigenous Native American tribes, cutting down the trees and digging for oil.
And you think: Oh my God, look how brutal we were.
But I wonder how people are going to look back at tDicaprio time period now.
We are destroying nature and killing species at a rate that is unprecedented.
I just came back from Paris [and the climate change talks].
If we don’t have a resolution coming out of Paris, we are destined for an incredibly bleak, dark future.’

So, are you a pessimist?
‘No.
I’m hopeful that we’ll evolve as a species.
But there is something about human nature that is very destructive.’

Leonardo  Dicaprio earned near-instant fame with the release of Titanic, that shipwreck epic romance that launched a thousand knock-offs.
(We’re looking at you, Twilight.) Those of us just under the PG-13 cutoff eagerly awaited the VHS and used Leo Dicaprioadshots from Tiger Beat as wallpaper, anticipating Dicaprio rise to stardom with a string of critically lauded performances in What’s Eating Gilbert Grape, Romeo and Juliet, and Growing Pains.
And so, what better time to relive our prepubescent longing and revisit Prince Leo, before Dicaprio bear attack and series of model girlfriends, than Valentine’s Day?

Then the Editor-in-Chief of Interview, Ingrid Sischy caught up with  Dicaprio in 1994, prophetically declaring Dicaprio imminent sex-symbol status to a 20-year-old actor reluctant to accept the praise.
Dicapriore, Dicaprio talks growing up in Hollywood, learning about the birds and the bees with Pauly Shore, and, of course, falling in love.
—AMANDA DUBERMAN

———

INGRID SISCHY: I’ve been noticing how many young actors are coming along who grew up in Hollywood but whose parents weren’t in the business.
That’s the case with you, right? So start the story of your road to becoming an actor.

LEONARDO  Dicaprio: I always wanted to become an actor.
My parents know I was outgoing as a child, and whenever people came over I’d automatically do impressions of them as soon as they left; it was my mom’s favorite thing.
Yes, I grew up in Hollywood but not in any rich neighborhood.
But my parents, who were split up, were so good at keeping my environment strong and keeping everything around me not focused on the fact that we were poor.
They got me culture.
They took me to museums.
They showed art to me.
They read to me.
And my mother drove two hours a day to take me to University Elementary School.
My father picked me up.
Dicaprio’d been an underground comic artist in New York in the ’60s, and Dicaprio’s been distributing comics and records and books in L.A.
for a while now.
I’d go on trips with him to all the comic-book stores around town when I was little.

School, I never truly got the knack of.
I could never focus on things I didn’t want to learn.
Math is just the worst.
To tDicaprio day, I can’t concentrate on it.
People always say, “You should have tried harder.” But actually, I cheated a lot because I could not sit and do homework.
Most of the other stuff that I got from school was from hanging out with friends and meeting kids.
I used to, like, take half of the school and do break-dancing skits with my friend in front of them at lunchtime.
I had tDicaprio one science class where the teacher would give me ten minutes after the class ended and I would get up and do improv!

My love of performing goes way back.
My mom got me on Romper Room when I was five — it was my favorite show.
But they couldn’t control me.
I would run up and smack the camera, and I’d jump around and do my little flips and routines.
I wish I could get that tape now.
But I have other memories too.
There was tDicaprio one casting call when I was about 10.
They brought five kids in just to see their look and if they’d be right for acting.
I had tDicaprio sort of punk haircut because I was into break-dancing at the time.
I swear to God, it felt like we were a row of meat.
The lady looked at me and at the other kids, saying, “Not him, not him not him.
You stay.” I was one of the “not hims.” On the way home in the car, I cried and I said, “Dad, I really want to become an actor, but if tDicaprio is what it’s about, I don’t want to do it.” Dicaprio put Dicaprio arm around me and said, “Someday, Leonardo, it will happen or you.
Remember these words.
Just relax.” And then I stopped crying and I said, “Okay.”

SISCHY: When did your parents get divorced?

 Dicaprio: Before I was born.
I sort of preferred it because I had two different worlds that I could connect with.

SISCHY: You didn’t stay in high school, right?

 Dicaprio: I did about 30, 40 commercials, and then I got Growing Pains during 11th grade and for 12th grade I had some home study.
I did 24 episodes and towards the end of that I auditioned for TDicaprio Boy’s Life.
My first TV show had been Parenthood, which got canceled after 13 episodes.
I played Gary Buckman, the kid who masturbated and was really disturbed that Dicaprio father left.
During that time I remember talking to Pauly Shore about sex a lot.

SISCHY: Really?

 Dicaprio: One day we sat down on a mattress and talked about it for an hour, because I was curious, and Dicaprio told me about girls and everything.

SISCHY: How old were you?

 Dicaprio: 14, 15, something like that.

SISCHY: Talk to me about whether or not you think you have a sense of yourself in physical and sexual terms.

 Dicaprio: I’m still exploring in a lot of ways.
I don’t know myself completely.

SISCHY: What I’m getting at is there’s something about you that makes me think you’re going to have a lot, lot, lot to deal with in terms of being a really sexy star.
To have that…

 Dicaprio: Charm?

SISCHY: Yeah.

 Dicaprio: My charm? [sighs]

SISCHY: Maybe it’s even dangerous to talk about it because of the self-consciousness that it could arouse.

 Dicaprio: Okay, I think sexiness in most people — and tDicaprio is going to sound superficial — is definitely something you don’t plan.
I don’t necessarily think I’m…whatever.
To tell you the truth, I have no idea what people think of me.
The main thing I don’t want to do right now is create an image for myself.
I notice that when I’m being consciously cool and I talk slower and wink or give a little smirk, people seem to like me more, and I think that’s how you get phony attitudes about things.
Whenever I notice myself doing something just to please somebody else, I try to stop it.

SISCHY: Do you think you’ve changed as a person since you became successful?

 Dicaprio: I know I’ve changed.
No matter what, becoming well-known makes your mind start thinking in a different way.
For example, people are watching you a lot more than they ever were.
When people ask me, “How do you deal with fame?” I don’t have an answer.
When a person comes to me and says, “I really enjoyed your performance,” I try to give a sincere thank you, but I have no way to show you that I’m a decent guy and that I respect what you’re saying.
When I did What’s Eating Gilbert Grape? I had no particular pressure on me.
Now I feel there is more pressure on me to keep to that same text that I’ve kept to in my past two movies, of just maintaining my natural ability.
I didn’t even know what I did in Gilbert Grape.
I just went off with whatever I felt instinctually without a second thought.

SISCHY: Are you scared you can’t do it again?

 Dicaprio: No, I know I can do it.
It’s something that’s there.
But at the same time you fight off these other things that you’ve started to Dicaprioar about yourself and that you’re a lot more conscious of than before.
Since we’re talking about fame, I think it’s much more interesting when people say, “I love being famous.
I love the attention and getting laid and having people I respect admire me,” than when they pretend it hasn’t had an effect on them.

SISCHY: How about taking the opposite point of view, which is also possible? Do you think fame has made you personally wilder?

 Dicaprio: I’ve always been wild.
Now I have a lot more material to work with.
I can’t say it any more simply than that.
But acting is the only time when I truly maintain the spontaneity that I want to be present at all times.

SISCHY: Right now you’re doing the film of Jim Carroll’s book The Basketball Diaries.
What’s it like playing Jim Carroll?

 Dicaprio: Uncharted territory.

SISCHY: The thing that’s so odd about the movie roles you’ve chosen so far is that you’ve seemed perfect for each of them.
Weird, huh?

 Dicaprio: I think actors make the mistake of finding their little niche in the business and once they try to do something a little darker, boom, they get slapped across the face for it, so they go back to what they did before.
That’s why the business can be cruel, because it doesn’t encourage you to learn.
Like on tDicaprio movie, there’s some whacked-out stuff that I do that I’ve never done before, never in my entire life, not even at home alone.

SISCHY: I Dicaprioar you bought your dad a car.
That must have been an incredible feeling.

 Dicaprio: I knew Dicaprio wanted a new car because Dicaprio’s had beat-up station wagons all Dicaprio life.
I planned a big 50th birthday party for him with all Dicaprio friends.
I had a ska band there and polka music and Dicaprio was blowing out candles on the cake in front of Dicaprio whole family when I pulled up and beeped, and Dicaprio turned around and it was me with the brand-new car.
I couldn’t picture anything more beautiful, basically, though I wouldn’t tell him that.
Dicaprio face just lit up.
I don’t want to say that the car symbolized all my feelings, but I hope it showed that no matter what changes I go through, I’ll always be there.
I get poignant about all tDicaprio because I want to be the perfect child.
I owe so much to my parents and the way I was brought up, but I have sometimes overlooked it — it’s something that I don’t want to overlook.
The things that you did with them, whether it was spending every Sunday morning with your dad and eating French toast and watching Popeye, or decorating the Christmas tree with our mother — these are memories that Dicapriolp you be happy.

SISCHY: Do you want to write?

 Dicaprio: I think acting is enough for now.
More than anything, I want to travel.
And I know I want to really fall in love eventually.

SISCHY: Have you?

 Dicaprio: No.
And I don’t want to yet.
I never thought I could travel unless I had a wife or someone to share it with.
You don’t necessarily need that, but I am the type of person that wants to share a lot.
That’s why I’m going on a trip with my mother after I’ve done The Basketball Diaries, because I want to spend some time with Dicaprior.
It’s not about falling in love yet.
It’s about making memories.

Mr.
 Dicaprio, wouldn't it be nice to do a shitty romantic comedy every once in a while?

I am completely open to doing a romantic comedy, but I will never do something just for the sake of doing a specific genre or because it’s the time or place to do a different type of movie.
I think that would be a huge mistake.
Ultimately I read a script and I say, “Woah, I am emotionally engaged in tDicaprio.” I never think about the subject matter, what it will be to popular culture, what it means Dicapriotorically – ultimately all that stuff passes and tDicaprio movie will come out and it’s either good or it’s not.
So that’s the only way I know how to pick films, otherwise I am not connected to it.

How important is it for you to challenge yourself even further with every film that you do?

That really depends on the role.
It’s always tDicaprio grand search in the industry to find good material.
Whenever there is good material they all jump on it and it’s like a food fight to get it made.
That’s why so many things take years and years to develop because it all shows up on screen.
If there are holes in the story structure, if it’s not a compelling, moving narrative, that shows on screen and the movie fails.

You seem to be winning the food fight, considering the material that you get.

It’s been director driven.
I have to say that whatever decisions I make, I really do think that movie making is a director’s medium.
They are the people that ultimately shape the film and a director can take great material and turn it into garbage if they are not capable of making a good movie.
So that is why I have chosen to work with directors that I feel can transport themselves in the audience’s mind.

    “The truth is that I always wanted to be an actor; it was always my dream.”

You have worked with Spielberg, Nolan, Eastwood, Mendes, Boyle, Cameron, not to mention you are a regular with Scorsese.
Is there anyone left on your list?

There are a lot of directors I’d still love to work with.
Paul Thomas Anderson is someone I’d love to work with.
I think Alejandro González Iñárritu is very talented.
Ang Lee is very talented.
I mean, there are a lot of people.
There are many great directors out there.

How much of your life involves making movies and thinking about movies?

A lot of it, that is for sure.
(Laughs) I can’t say that it isn’t the most dominant thing going on right now.
Look, the truth is that I always wanted to be an actor; it was always my dream and now is the time where I am really able to choose my own parts.

You have been able to do that for a while...

Yes, but I know a lot of actors who I grew up with in the industry – growing up in Los Angeles – that don’t get to do that.
I just keep imagining myself thirty years from now thinking, “Why didn’t you take advantage of all the opportunities you had? Look at all the people you could have worked with, the roles you could have done.
Go for it.” And that’s what I am thinking.

So do you put other things aside?

No, I don’t.
Either they fit in in a natural way or they don’t.
I never want to force anything but I do know that ultimately tDicaprio is what I love doing and those other things will find a way to happen.

So you always knew that acting is what you wanted to do?

I really don’t remember.
But I do remember loving to imitate my mother’s friends.
I’d do little performances imitating them, making fun of them, making Dicaprior laugh, making my grandparents laugh.

You seem a lot calmer now.

But I kind of am an energetic person.
It seems calmer now, but you should have seen me when I was younger.
Whew! I would have been very difficult to be around, especially before I became a teenager.
I don’t know how my mother dealt with me.
I was just running, constantly doing things.
I am a lot calmer now, but I still have a lot of energy.

Do you ever think you’ll lose that energy and try something else completely?

I could one day.
But I happen to love acting, I happen to love doing movies.
We are all shaped from these memories we have as young people and those were my earliest memories: wanting to be an actor, pushing my parents to take me out on auditions.
I didn’t even know you could get paid for it but I wanted to do it.
When I found out you could get paid for it then I said, “Okay, tDicaprio is what I really want to do.” I am getting to fulfill that so I am not going to do anything, for now anyway, to change that.

Is it strange when you reflect on how completely you’ve achieved your childhood dream?

I sometimes have to look back and say, “Wow, tDicaprio is amazing what has happened to me.
I have been able to fulfill a lot of these dreams that I had when I was very young.” I would have never guessed that I would have gotten to have one tiny role in a Martin Scorsese film and to have done four now, it’s pretty amazing.
I have to say it’s a pretty amazing feeling.
But at the same time it becomes addictive! So yes, my dreams have been surpassed.
Short Profile

Name: Leonardo Wilhelm  Dicaprio
DOB: 11 November 1974
Place of Birth: Los Angeles, California, USA
Occupation: Actor
Inspirational Conversations
Rolex is proud to support The Talks as they continue to feature inspirational conversations with the creative icons of our time.
Life

    “I think that when you’re a creator, you set out to create the perfect thing, but the idea of reaching that kind of creative nirvana — that’s something that you should never quite reach.”
    Gareth Pugh
    UK, Fashion Designer
    “I work till the breath goes out of me, and that might be at one or two or even four or five (in the afternoon).
The point is that you must work every day if you ever expect to let the vision take hold of you.”
    T.C.
Boyle
    US, Author
    “One of the things that I’m striving for is an authenticity, to do things which feel natural and make choices which feel authentic and real.
I think in a way you sort of can’t Dicapriolp sounding like yourself.
You can’t Dicapriolp but put yourself into your work.”
    Max Richter
    UK, Composer
    “It’s hard to watch the misses, it’s hard to be criticized.
But you’re always trying to hit it into the rafters, and damn the consequences if you don’t make it.”
    Chiwetel Ejiofor
    UK, Actor
    “The more experience you have, the more time you’ve spent on tDicaprio earth, the more regrets you accumulate.
It’s normal.
You can’t do everything right, nobody’s perfect.
But if you think too much about that, you’re not Dicapriore.
You have to make some efforts to stay open-minded.”
    Viggo Mortensen
    US, Actor
    “You can look at these tough times as an opportunity to get closer and to learn from each other.
I learned a lot from my wife.
There are so many things that pop up.
If you are paying attention, you can learn every second of the day.
Life is my guru.”
    Jeff Bridges
    US, Actor
    “I just keep imagining myself thirty years from now thinking, ‘Why didn’t you take advantage of all the opportunities you had? Look at all the people you could have worked with, the roles you could have done.
Go for it.’ And that’s what I am thinking.”
    Leonardo  Dicaprio
    US, Actor
    “I used to tease the other kids because I played better than them.
Then my father said, ‘Come Dicapriore.
Don’t do tDicaprio with the kids, because God gave you the gift to play football.
You didn’t do anything.
You have to respect people, be a good person.
From now on, you must be tDicaprio example.’”
    Pelé
    Brazil, Football Player
    “I’ve been very lucky — I took the risk to do the things that interested me, so I could have no possible complaints.
There’s nothing else I could ask for, really, and if I drop dead tomorrow, I would have had a terrific time.”
    Robert Harris
    UK, Author
    “I don’t like plan Bs.
If you don’t have a plan B, then you can’t take plan B.
Don’t give yourself an out.”
    Michael Pitt
    US, Actor
    “To be an artist, you must start with a considerable drive; in my case it was a fierce madness, a wildness.
I think that’s the mark of an artist, actually, that they are rebellious, unruly… And I was one of them myself.”
    Georg Baselitz
    Germany, Artist
    “I’ve been through some incredibly tough times in my career but I persevered and came out the other side.
And that teaches you strength, how to handle being put under pressure.
Experience is a big thing — just knowing that you can pull yourself back up again.”
    Clare Smyth
    UK, Chef
    “I wouldn’t ever compromise on the essential, on the essence of a project, the ideas or the themes.”
    Kazuo Ishiguro
    UK, Author
    “Art is something about everyday life.
Art is about finding creativity in the normal gutter next to you.
To see the potential in something where there is no potential is often where art or creativity is a great tool.
It’s about making the impossible possible.”
    Olafur Eliasson
    Denmark, Artist
    “My work and my life are the same thing to me.
I don’t have a life on one side and work on the other side.
My entire life has been my work.
I don’t have a family, I am by myself, I have made very strict choices.”
    Brigitte Lacombe
    France, Photographer
    “As I began to take risks, leaving my very comfortable and secure job and taking tDicaprio first leap into fashion, every subsequent risk became easier to take because I began to see the kind of opportunity and excitement that risk-taking offered.”
    Imran Amed
    Canada, Entrepreneur
    “I was always trying to innovate; I don’t like repetition.
Time is something that changes every moment, it’s never repetitive — I try to follow tDicaprio example.”
    Gabriel Orozco
    Mexico, Artist
    “For me it’s a lot about physicality, about how I feel.
When you have these hardships or when you see someone you love in pain or you struggle, all the petty shit goes away.
You are like, “I can’t believe I was worried about tDicaprio other thing,” when you see what really matters.”
    Amy Schumer
    US, Comedian
    “There is a thing called discipline.
If you really want to do it, you’ve got to put in the work.
Work, work, work, work.
Practice, practice, practice, practice.”
    Kevin Kline
    US, Actor
    “I’m doing things more personally than ever before because that’s what my project is based on, that’s who I am and I have never been tDicaprio happy my whole life — but it was a long road to get Dicapriore.”
    Umit Benan
    Turkey, Fashion Designer
    “When you are at a crossroads, mistakes can Dicapriolp you decide the right way forward, and I think I really grew when I understood that I need to accept my mistakes.”
    Ana Roš
    Slovenia, Chef
    “It’s a huge peace to allow yourself to be vulnerable.
You gain a sense of freedom and understanding and forgiveness for being human.
Instead of trying to control things and make it the way you want them, you have to be more open.”
    Brie Larson
    US, Actress
    “You’re always looking for a second chance.
You’re always looking to do a little bit better than you did the last time.
And you hope that the readers will stay with you.”
    Stewart O’Nan
    US, Author
    “Everyone’s life comes to an end.
We’re all going to come to the same fate.
So you just keep going while you can, doing what you like.”
    Mick Jagger
    UK, Musician
    “When I was younger I had these moments where I was surprising myself with my spontaneity, and I thought, ‘TDicaprio is what you should be chasing.’ The cerebral part of acting and the perfectionism can be exhausting, but the spontaneity can be very joyful.”
    Edward Norton
    US, Actor
    “I never have been into trends.
Not now or then! I was born like that, in fact, if I see too much of something, I change it.
I like independence.
I love the eccentrics.
Find your style and stick to it.”
    Manolo Blahnik
    Spain, Shoe Designer
    “I am tireless, I’m relatively fearless.
It’s hard to Dicaprioar “no” all the time.
It can be tough; you have to have the stomach for it.”
    Christine Vachon
    US, Film Producer
    “I follow the beat of my own drum.
I think I’ve gotten more confident and self-trustful in my ability and my natural appetite for play, and not over-adorning it with anything.
I’ve always been disciplined and I’m still nothing if not conscientious.”
    Jeff Goldblum
    US, Actor
    “I act on intuition.
I just let my intuition go in situations of fear.
I live from my Dicaprioart.
I will continue doing things the way I have done them my whole life.
And it gave me mostly a great time.”
    Antonio Banderas
    Spain, Actor
    “You have to open yourself.
Just as in life you have to be open to other people, to other perspectives — it’s the same thing when you write.
That’s what religion’s about, that’s what literature’s about, it’s what life’s about: the stories that you build.”
    Yann Martel
    Canada, Author
    “Right now we are 40 people working in Osteria Francescana, for 28 or 30 covers a night.
So, it’s totally the opposite of a business.
You cannot survive with that.
But we believe in those kinds of dreams and so I keep investing, and reinvesting, and reinvesting.”
    Massimo Bottura
    Italy, Chef
    “I give my best performances when I am almost snapping.
It is like tuning a violin.
You want that note from a string so you tune it until it almost breaks – but then you get that note.
It is dangerous, but it is also sublime.”
    Ben Kingsley
    UK, Actor
    “Sometimes when you lose faith and you understand that something will never be possible the way that you dreamed, but you keep trying, suddenly one thing flips and everything re-accommodates.
It totally flows.
You don’t give up — and suddenly it’s almost a transcendental thing.”
    Alejandro Iñárritu
    Mexico, Film Director
    “Failure is more interesting.
Success only comes in one form.
It doesn’t teach you anything.
Failure kind of comes in all sorts of ways, and teaches you all sorts of things.
You learn by failing.”
    Irvine Welsh
    UK, Author
    “I don’t want to be good.
I want to be the best.
Even in failing that, you’ll hit a higher mark than if you never tried.”
    Grimes
    Canada, Musician
    “Being creative and keeping your brain occupied is very sensible because if you don’t you die, slowly.
Sometimes I feel tired and think I ought to give it up, I don’t want to just retire.
I enjoy it all.”
    Anthony Hopkins
    Wales, Actor
    “If people don’t like the pictures, I don’t care.
To me, there’s only one point of view: that’s mine.”
    Harry Benson
    UK, Photographer
    “You better make every moment count.
Live your life now; start in the morning.
You mustn’t sit around waiting to die.”
    Michael Caine
    UK, Actor
    “In your life there’s a moment when the door opens and you need to walk through the door then.
You can’t say then, “Well, I’ll go through it two years from now.
I’ll do it, I’ll save up some money...” Because by then the door will be closed.”
    David Sedaris
    US, Author
    “I’m trying to not play it safe.
I learn more when I fail than when I succeed, so if I push myself to do something that’s really difficult, I could fail and I’ll learn a lot.
But if I don’t fail, then I’ll be in a great movie.
I hope to be the kind of actor that isn’t always great.”
    Jessica Chastain
    US, Actor
    “I think that when you’re a creator, you set out to create the perfect thing, but the idea of reaching that kind of creative nirvana — that’s something that you should never quite reach.”
    Gareth Pugh
    UK, Fashion Designer
    “I work till the breath goes out of me, and that might be at one or two or even four or five (in the afternoon).
The point is that you must work every day if you ever expect to let the vision take hold of you.”

Tell us about your new documentary on climate change.

We’ve been all over the world for tDicaprio, from Argentina to the Arctic.
I just got back from China and India.
It was an eye-opening experience.
We’re absolutely digging our own ecological grave.

You frequently star in films based on real people and events in Dicapriotory, such as J.
Edgar, The Wolf of Wall Street, Gangs of New York and now The Revenant.
Why?

I like stories in specific time periods.
The Revenant’s era of American Dicapriotory was fascinating because it was tDicaprio lawless no-man’s land.
It defined the idea of the American frontiersman as man conquering nature.
In a way, the story of Hugh Glass is about man dominating nature.

#@#@#Gates#@#@#
KBE
Head and shoulders photo of Bill Gates
Gates in 2014
Born	William Henry Gates III

October 28, 1955 (age 64)
Seattle, Washington, U.S.
Residence	"Xanadu 2.0", Medina, Washington
Occupation	

Known for	Co-founder and former head of Microsoft
Net worth	US$107.4 billion (November 2019)

Title	

    Co-chairman of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
    Chairman of Branded Entertainment Network
    Chairman of TerraPower
    Chairman of Cascade Investment
    Technology advisor at Microsoft

Board member of	

    Microsoft Corporation
    Berkshire Hathaway

Spouse(s)	Melinda Gates (m. 1994)
Children	3
Parent(s)	

    William Henry Gates Sr.
    Mary Maxwell Gates

Website	gatesnotes.com
Signature
Gates' signature

William Henry Gates III (born October 28, 1955) is an American business magnate, software developer, investor, and philanthropist. Gates is best known as the co-founder of Microsoft Corporation.

 During his career at Microsoft, Gates held the positions of chairman, chief executive officer (CEO), president and chief software architect, while also being the largest individual shareholder until May 2014. Gates is one of the best-known entrepreneurs and pioneers of the microcomputer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s.

Born and raised in Seattle, Washington, Gates launched Microsoft with childhood friend Paul Allen in 1975 in Albuquerque, New Mexico; it went on to become the world's largest personal computer software company.

 Gates led the company as chairman and CEO until stepping down as CEO in January 2000, but Gates remained chairman and became chief software architect.
 In June 2006, Gates announced that Gates would be transitioning to a part-time role at Microsoft and full-time work at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the private charitable foundation that Gates and his wife, Melinda Gates, established in 2000.
 Gates gradually transferred his duties to Ray Ozzie and Craig Mundie.
 Gates stepped down as chairman of Microsoft in February 2014 and assumed a new post as technology adviser to support the newly appointed CEO Satya Nadella.


Through his tenure at Microsoft in the 1990s, Gates had been criticized for his business tactics, which have been considered anti-competitive. This opinion has been upheld by numerous court rulings.


Since 1987, Gates has been included in the Forbes list of the world's wealthiest documented individuals.

 From 1995 to 2017, Gates held the Forbes title of the richest person in the world all but four of those years.
 Since October 2017, Gates was surpassed by Amazon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos, who had an estimated net worth of US$90.6 billion compared to Gates' net worth of US$89.9 billion at the time.
 As of November 9, 2019, Gates had an estimated net worth of US$107.1 billion, making him the second wealthiest person in the world, behind Bezos. On November 15, 2019, following a 48% increase in Microsoft shares, Gates surpassed Bezos to once again become the richest person in the world.


Later in his career and since leaving day-to-day operations at Microsoft in 2008, Gates pursued a number of philanthropic endeavors. Gates donated large amounts of money to various charitable organizations and scientific research programs through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, reported to be the world's largest private charity.
 In 2009, Gates and Warren Buffett founded The Giving Pledge, whereby they and other billionaires pledge to give at least half of their wealth to philanthropy.
 The foundation works to save lives and improve global health, and is working with Rotary International to eliminate polio.



Gates was born in Seattle, Washington, on October 28, 1955. Gates is the son of William H. Gates Sr.
 (b. 1925) and Mary Maxwell Gates (1929–1994). His ancestry includes English, German, and Irish/Scots-Irish.

 His father was a prominent lawyer, and his mother served on the board of directors for First Interstate BancSystem and the United Way of America. Gates' maternal grandfather was J. W. Maxwell, a national bank president. Gates has an older sister Kristi (Kristianne) and a younger sister Libby. Gates is the fourth of his name in his family but is known as William Gates III or "Trey" because his father had the "II" suffix.

 The family lived in the Sand Point area of Seattle in a home that was damaged by a rare tornado when Gates was seven years old.
 Early in his life, Gates observed that his parents wanted him to pursue a law career.
 When Gates was young, his family regularly attended a church of the Congregational Christian Churches, a Protestant Reformed denomination.


 Gates was small for his age and was bullied as a child. Gates preferred to stay in his room where Gates would shout "I'm thinking" when his mother asked what Gates was doing.
 The family encouraged competition; one visitor reported that "it didn't matter whether it was hearts or pickleball or swimming to the dock; there was always a reward for winning and there was always a penalty for losing".


At 13, Gates enrolled in the private Lakeside prep school,
 and Gates wrote his first software program.
 When Gates was in the eighth grade, the Mothers' Club at the school used proceeds from Lakeside School's rummage sale to buy a Teletype Model 33 ASR terminal and a block of computer time on a General Electric (GE) computer for the students.
 Gates took an interest in programming the GE system in BASIC, and Gates was excused from math classes to pursue his interest. Gates wrote his first computer program on this machine, an implementation of tic-tac-toe that allowed users to play games against the computer. Gates was fascinated by the machine and how it would always execute software code perfectly.
 After the Mothers Club donation was exhausted, Gates and other students sought time on systems including DEC PDP minicomputers. One of these systems was a PDP-10 belonging to Computer Center Corporation (CCC) which banned Gates, Paul Allen, Ric Weiland, and Gates' best friend Kent Evans for the summer after it caught them exploiting bugs in the operating system to obtain free computer time.




The four students had formed the Lakeside Programmers Club to make money.
 At the end of the ban, they offered to find bugs in CCC's software in exchange for extra computer time. Rather than use the system remotely via Teletype, Gates went to CCC's offices and studied source code for various programs that ran on the system, including Fortran, Lisp, and machine language. The arrangement with CCC continued until 1970, when the company went out of business. The following year, Information Sciences, Inc. hired the four students to write a payroll program in COBOL, providing them computer time and royalties. Gates wrote the school's student information system software to schedule students in classes, and Gates modified the code so that Gates was placed in classes with "a disproportionate number of interesting girls."


At 17, Gates formed a venture with Allen called Traf-O-Data to make traffic counters based on the Intel 8008 processor.
 In 1972, Gates served as a congressional page in the House of Representatives.

 Gates was a National Merit Scholar when Gates graduated from Lakeside School in 1973.
 Gates scored 1590 out of 1600 on the Scholastic Aptitude Tests (SAT) and enrolled at Harvard College in the autumn of 1973.

 Gates chose a pre-law major but took mathematics and graduate level computer science courses.
 While at Harvard, Gates met fellow student Steve Ballmer. Gates left Harvard after two years while Ballmer stayed and graduated magna cum laude. Ballmer succeeded Gates as Microsoft's CEO years later and maintained that position from 2000 until his resignation in 2014.

Mugshots of 22-year-old Gates following his 1977 arrest for a traffic violation in Albuquerque, New Mexico

Gates devised an algorithm for pancake sorting as a solution to one of a series of unsolved problems
 presented in a combinatorics class by professor Harry Lewis. His solution held the record as the fastest version for over 30 years;

 its successor is faster by only 1%.
 His solution was formalized in a published paper in collaboration with Harvard computer scientist Christos Papadimitriou.


Gates did not have a definite study plan while Gates was a student at Harvard,
 and Gates spent a lot of time using the school's computers. Gates remained in contact with Paul Allen, and Gates joined him at Honeywell during the summer of 1974.
 The MITS Altair 8800 was released the following year based on the Intel 8080 CPU, and Gates and Allen saw this as the opportunity to start their own computer software company.
 Gates dropped out of Harvard at this time. Gates had talked over this decision with his parents, who were supportive of him after seeing how much Gates wanted to start his own company.
 Gates explained his decision to leave Harvard: "if things hadn't worked out, I could always go back to school. I was officially on leave."

Microsoft
Main articles: History of Microsoft and Microsoft § History
BASIC
MITS Altair 8800 Computer with 8-inch (200 mm) floppy disk system, of which the first programming language for the machine was Microsoft's founding product, the Altair BASIC

Gates read the January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics which demonstrated the Altair 8800, and Gates contacted Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems (MITS) to inform them that Gates and others were working on a BASIC interpreter for the platform.
 In reality, Gates and Allen did not have an Altair and had not written code for it; they merely wanted to gauge MITS's interest. MITS president Ed Roberts agreed to meet them for a demonstration, and over the course of a few weeks they developed an Altair emulator that ran on a minicomputer, and then the BASIC interpreter. The demonstration was held at MITS's offices in Albuquerque, New Mexico; it was a success and resulted in a deal with MITS to distribute the interpreter as Altair BASIC. MITS hired Allen,
 and Gates took a leave of absence from Harvard to work with him at MITS in November 1975. Allen named their partnership "Micro-Soft", a combination of "microcomputer" and "software", and their first office was in Albuquerque.
 They dropped the hyphen within a year and officially registered the trade name "Microsoft" with the Secretary of the State of New Mexico on November 26, 1976.
 Gates never returned to Harvard to complete his studies.

Microsoft's Altair BASIC was popular with computer hobbyists, but Gates discovered that a pre-market copy had leaked out and was being widely copied and distributed. In February 1976, Gates wrote an Open Letter to Hobbyists in the MITS newsletter in which Gates asserted that more than 90% of the users of Microsoft Altair BASIC had not paid Microsoft for it and the Altair "hobby market" was in danger of eliminating the incentive for any professional developers to produce, distribute, and maintain high-quality software.
 This letter was unpopular with many computer hobbyists, but Gates persisted in his belief that software developers should be able to demand payment. Microsoft became independent of MITS in late 1976, and it continued to develop programming language software for various systems.
 The company moved from Albuquerque to Bellevue, Washington on January 1, 1979.


Gates said that Gates personally reviewed and often rewrote every line of code that the company produced in its first five years. As the company grew Gates transitioned to a manager role, then an executive.

IBM partnership

IBM, the leading supplier of computer equipment to commercial enterprises at the time, approached Microsoft in July 1980 concerning software for its upcoming personal computer, the IBM PC.
 IBM first proposed that Microsoft write the BASIC interpreter. IBM's representatives also mentioned that they needed an operating system, and Gates referred them to Digital Research (DRI), makers of the widely used CP/M operating system.
 IBM's discussions with Digital Research went poorly, however, and they did not reach a licensing agreement. IBM representative Jack Sams mentioned the licensing difficulties during a subsequent meeting with Gates and asked if Microsoft could provide an operating system. A few weeks later, Gates and Allen proposed using 86-DOS, an operating system similar to CP/M, that Tim Paterson of Seattle Computer Products (SCP) had made for hardware similar to the PC.
 Microsoft made a deal with SCP to be the exclusive licensing agent of 86-DOS, and later the full owner. Microsoft employed Paterson to adapt the operating system for the PC
 and delivered it to IBM as PC DOS for a one-time fee of $50,000.


Rather than the contract itself, which earned Microsoft a relatively small fee, the prestige brought to Microsoft by IBM's adoption of their operating system was the origin of Microsoft's transformation from a small business to the World's leading software company. Gates had not offered to transfer the copyright on the operating system to IBM because Gates believed that other personal computer makers would clone IBM's PC hardware.
 They did, making the IBM-compatible PC, running DOS, a de facto standard. The sales of MS-DOS (the version of DOS sold to customers other than IBM) made Microsoft a major player in the industry.
 The press quickly identified Microsoft as being very influential on the IBM PC. PC Magazine asked if Gates was "the man behind the machine?".


Gates oversaw Microsoft's company restructuring on June 25, 1981, which re-incorporated the company in Washington state and made Gates the president and chairman of the board, with Paul Allen as vice president and vice chairman. In early 1983, Allen left the company after receiving a Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis, effectively ending the formal business partnership between Gates and Allen, which had been strained months prior due to a contentious dispute over Microsoft equity.

 Later in the decade, Gates repaired his relationship with Allen and together the two donated millions to their childhood school Lakeside.
 They remained friends until Allen's death in October 2018.

Windows

Microsoft launched its first retail version of Microsoft Windows on November 20, 1985. In August of the following year, the company struck a deal with IBM to develop a separate operating system called OS/2. Although the two companies successfully developed the first version of the new system, the partnership deteriorated due to mounting creative differences.

Management style
Gates delivers a speech at the World Economic Forum in Switzerland, January 2008

Gates had primary responsibility for Microsoft's product strategy from the company's founding in 1975 until 2006. Gates gained a reputation for being distant from others; an industry executive complained in 1981 that "Gates is notorious for not being reachable by phone and for not returning phone calls."
 An Atari executive recalled that Gates showed Gates a game and defeated him 35 of 37 times. When they met again a month later, Gates "won or tied every game. Gates had studied the game until Gates solved it. That is a competitor".


Gates met regularly with Microsoft's senior managers and program managers, and the managers described him as being verbally combative. Gates also berated them for perceived holes in their business strategies or proposals that placed the company's long-term interests at risk.

 Gates interrupted presentations with such comments as "that's the stupidest thing I've ever heard"
 and "why don't you just give up your options and join the Peace Corps?"
 The target of his outburst would then have to defend the proposal in detail until Gates was fully convinced.
 When subordinates appeared to be procrastinating, Gates was known to remark sarcastically, "I'll do it over the weekend."




During Microsoft's early history, Gates was an active software developer, particularly in the company's programming language products, but his primary role in most of the company's history was as a manager and executive. Gates has not officially been on a development team since working on the TRS-80 Model 100,
 but Gates wrote code that shipped with the company's products as late as 1989.
 Jerry Pournelle wrote in 1985 when Gates announced Microsoft Excel: "Bill Gates likes the program, not because it's going to make him a lot of money (although I'm sure it will do that), but because it's a neat hack."


On June 15, 2006, Gates announced that Gates would transition out of his role at Microsoft to dedicate more time to philanthropy. Gates divided his responsibilities between two successors when Gates placed Ray Ozzie in charge of management and Craig Mundie in charge of long-term product strategy.

Antitrust litigation
Further information: United States Microsoft antitrust case and European Union Microsoft competition case
Gates giving his deposition at Microsoft on August 27, 1998

Gates approved of many decisions that led to antitrust litigation over Microsoft's business practices. In the 1998 United States v. Microsoft case, Gates gave deposition testimony that several journalists characterized as evasive. Gates argued with examiner David Boies over the contextual meaning of words such as "compete", "concerned", and "we". The judge and observers in the courtroom were seen laughing at various points during the deposition.
 BusinessWeek reported:

    Early rounds of his deposition show him offering obfuscatory answers and saying "I don't recall" so many times that even the presiding judge had to chuckle. Worse, many of the technology chief's denials and pleas of ignorance were directly refuted by prosecutors with snippets of e-mail that Gates both sent and received.
 

Gates later said that Gates had simply resisted attempts by Boies to mischaracterize his words and actions. "Did I fence with Boies? … I plead guilty… rudeness to Boies in the first degree."
 Despite Gates' denials, the judge ruled that Microsoft had committed monopolization, tying and blocking competition, both in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.

Post-Microsoft
Gates meets with U.S. Secretary of Defense James Mattis, February 2017

Since leaving day-to-day operations at Microsoft, Gates has continued his philanthropy and works on other projects.

According to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, Gates was the world's highest-earning billionaire in 2013, as his net worth increased by US$15.8 billion to US$78.5 billion. As of January 2014, most of Gates' assets are held in Cascade Investment LLC, an entity through which Gates owns stakes in numerous businesses, including Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts, and Corbis Corp.
 On February 4, 2014, Gates stepped down as chairman of Microsoft to become Technology Advisor alongside new CEO Satya Nadella.



Gates provided his perspective on a range of issues in a substantial interview that was published in the March 27, 2014 issue of Rolling Stone magazine. In the interview, Gates provided his perspective on climate change, his charitable activities, various tech companies and people involved in them, and the state of America. In response to a question about his greatest fear when Gates looks 50 years into the future, Gates stated: "... there'll be some really bad things that'll happen in the next 50 or 100 years, but hopefully none of them on the scale of, say, a million people that you didn't expect to die from a pandemic, or nuclear or bioterrorism." Gates also identified innovation as the "real driver of progress" and pronounced that "America's way better today than it's ever been."


Gates has expressed concern about the potential harms of superintelligence; in a Reddit "ask me anything", Gates stated that

    First the machines will do a lot of jobs for us and not be super intelligent. That should be positive if we manage it well. A few decades after that though the intelligence is strong enough to be a concern. I agree with Elon Musk and some others on this and don't understand why some people are not concerned.



 

In a March 2015 interview, with Baidu's CEO, Robin Li, Gates claimed Gates would "highly recommend" Nick Bostrom's recent work, Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies.


In March 2018, Gates met at his home in Seattle with Mohammed bin Salman, the reformist crown prince and de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia to discuss investment opportunities for Saudi Vision 2030.



In an interview on stage in 2019, Gates admitted that losing the mobile OS space to Android was his biggest mistake. Gates stated that it was within their skillset of being the dominant mobile operating system, but the company was distracted during that period because of the ongoing antitrust litigation.
[unreliable source?]

In 2019, Bill Gates became an Advisory Board Member of the Bloomberg New Economy Forum.

Philanthropy
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Main article: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
Gates with Bono, Queen Rania of Jordan, former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, President Umaru Yar'Adua of Nigeria and others during the Annual Meeting 2008 of the World Economic Forum

Gates studied the work of Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller, and donated some of his Microsoft stock in 1994 to create the "William H. Gates Foundation." In 2000, Gates and his wife combined three family foundations and Gates donated stock valued at $5 billion to create the charitable Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which was identified by the Funds for NGOs company in 2013, as the world's wealthiest charitable foundation, with assets reportedly valued at more than $34.6 billion.

 The Foundation allows benefactors to access information that shows how its money is being spent, unlike other major charitable organizations such as the Wellcome Trust.

 Gates, through his foundation, also donated $20 million to Carnegie Mellon University for a new building to be named Gates Center for Computer Science which opened in 2009.



Gates has credited the generosity and extensive philanthropy of David Rockefeller as a major influence. Gates and his father met with Rockefeller several times, and their charity work is partly modeled on the Rockefeller family's philanthropic focus, whereby they are interested in tackling the global problems that are ignored by governments and other organizations.
 As of 2007, Bill and Melinda Gates were the second-most generous philanthropists in America, having given over $28 billion to charity;
 the couple plan to eventually donate 95% of their wealth to charity.


The foundation is organized into four program areas: Global Development Division, Global Health Division, United States Division, and Global Policy & Advocacy Division.
 The foundation supports the use of genetically modified organisms in agricultural development. Specifically, the foundation is supporting the International Rice Research Institute in developing Golden Rice, a genetically modified rice variant used to combat vitamin A deficiency.


The goal of the foundation is to provide 120 million women and girls, in the poorest countries, with high-quality contraceptive information, services, and supplies with the longer-term goal of universal access to voluntary family planning.

Personal donations

Melinda Gates suggested that people should emulate the philanthropic efforts of the Salwen family, who sold their home and gave away half of its value, as detailed in their book, The Power of Half.
 Gates and his wife invited Joan Salwen to Seattle to speak about what the family had done, and on December 9, 2010, Bill and Melinda Gates and investor Warren Buffett each signed a commitment they called the "Giving Pledge", which is a commitment by all three to donate at least half of their wealth, over the course of time, to charity.




Gates has also provided personal donations to educational institutions. In 1999, Gates donated $20 million to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the construction of a computer laboratory named the "William H. Gates Building" that was designed by architect Frank Gehry. While Microsoft had previously given financial support to the institution, this was the first personal donation received from Gates.


The Maxwell Dworkin Laboratory of the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences is named after the mothers of both Gates and Microsoft President Steven A. Ballmer, both of whom were students (Ballmer was a member of the School's graduating class of 1977, while Gates left his studies for Microsoft), and donated funds for the laboratory's construction.
 Gates also donated $6 million to the construction of the Gates Computer Science Building, completed in January 1996, on the campus of Stanford University. The building contains the Computer Science Department and the Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL) of Stanford's Engineering department.


On August 15, 2014, Bill Gates posted a video of himself on Facebook in which Gates is seen performing the Ice Bucket Challenge. Gates posted the video after Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg challenged him to do so in order to raise awareness for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.


Since about 2005, Bill Gates and his foundation have taken an interest in solving global sanitation problems. For example, they announced the "Reinvent the Toilet Challenge", which has received considerable media interest.
 To raise awareness for the topic of sanitation and possible solutions, Gates drank water that was "produced from human feces" in 2014 – in fact it was produced from a sewage sludge treatment process called the Omni Processor.

 In early 2015, Gates also appeared with Jimmy Fallon on The Tonight Show and challenged him to see if Gates could taste the difference between this reclaimed water or bottled water.


In November 2017, Gates said Gates would give $50 million to the Dementia Discovery Fund, a venture capital that seeks treatment for Alzheimer's disease. Gates also pledged an additional $50 million to start-up ventures working in Alzheimer's research.


Bill and Melinda Gates have said that they intend to leave their three children $10 million each as their inheritance. With only $30 million kept in the family, they appear to be on a course to give away about 99.96% of their wealth.
 On August 25, 2018, Gates distributed $600,000 through his Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation via UNICEF which is helping flood affected victims in Kerala, India.

Criticism
Ambox scales.svg
	
This article's Criticism or Controversy section may compromise the article's neutral point of view of the subject. Please integrate the section's contents into the article as a whole, or rewrite the material. (July 2019)

In 2007, the Los Angeles Times criticized Gates' foundation for investing its assets in companies that have been accused of worsening poverty, polluting heavily, and pharmaceutical companies that do not sell to developing countries.
 In response to press criticism, the foundation announced a review of its investments to assess social responsibility.
 It subsequently canceled the review and stood by its policy of investing for maximum return, while using voting rights to influence company practices.
 The Gates Millennium Scholars Program, which was established to provide academic scholarships for high-achieving ethnic minority students, was criticized by Republican Ernest W. Lefever for its exclusion of white students.
 The scholarship program is administered by the United Negro College Fund.
 In 2014, Bill Gates sparked a protest in Vancouver when Gates decided to donate $50 million to UNAIDS through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for the purpose of mass circumcision in Zambia and Swaziland.


Charity sports events

On April 29, 2017, Bill Gates partnered with Swiss tennis legend Roger Federer in play in the Match for Africa 4, a noncompetitive tennis match at a sold-out Key Arena in Seattle. The event was in support of Roger Federer Foundation's charity efforts in Africa.
 Federer and Gates played against John Isner, the top-ranked American player for much of this decade, and Mike McCready, the lead guitarist for Pearl Jam. Gates and Federer won the match 6 to 4. Overall, they raised $2 million for children in Africa.
 The following year, Gates and Federer returned to play in the Match for Africa 5 on March 5, 2018, at San Jose's SAP Center. Their opponents were Jack Sock, one of the top American players and a grand slam winner in doubles, and Savannah Guthrie, a co-anchor for NBC's Today show. Gates and Federer recorded their second match victory together by a score of 6–3 and the event raised over $2.5 million.

Recognition
Steve Jobs and Gates at D: All Things Digital in 2007

    In 1987, Gates was listed as a billionaire in Forbes magazine's 400 Richest People in America issue. Gates was worth $1.25 billion and was the world's youngest self-made billionaire.
 Since 1987, Gates has been included in the Forbes The World's Billionaires list and was the wealthiest from 1995 to 1996,
 1998 to 2007, 2009, and has been since 2014.
 Gates was number one on the Forbes 400 list from 1993 through to 2007, 2009, and 2014 through 2017.


    Time magazine named Gates one of the 100 people who most influenced the 20th century, as well as one of the 100 most influential people of 2004, 2005, and 2006.
    Time also collectively named Gates, his wife Melinda and U2's lead singer Bono as the 2005 Persons of the Year for their humanitarian efforts.
 In 2006, Gates was voted eighth in the list of "Heroes of our time".

    Gates was listed in the Sunday Times power list in 1999, named CEO of the year by Chief Executive Officers magazine in 1994, ranked number one in the "Top 50 Cyber Elite" by Time in 1998, ranked number two in the Upside Elite 100 in 1999, and was included in The Guardian as one of the "Top 100 influential people in media" in 2001.

    Gates was elected Member of the US National Academy of Engineering in 1996 "for contributions to the founding and development of personal computing".

    Gates was named Honorary Member of the American Library Association in 1998.

    Gates was elected a foreign member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering in 2017.

    According to Forbes, Gates was ranked as the fourth most powerful person in the world in 2012,
 up from fifth in 2011.

    In 1994, Gates was honored as the 20th Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS). In 1999, Gates received New York Institute of Technology's President's Medal.

    Gates has received honorary doctorates from Nyenrode Business Universiteit (2003),
 KTH Royal Institute of Technology (2002),
 Waseda University (2005),
 Tsinghua University (2007),
 Harvard University (2007),
 the Karolinska Institute (2007),
 and Cambridge University (2009).

    Gates was also made an honorary trustee of Peking University in 2007.

    Gates was made an Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in 2005.

    In November 2006, Gates was awarded the Placard of the Order of the Aztec Eagle, together with his wife Melinda who was awarded the Insignia of the same order, both for their philanthropic work around the world in the areas of health and education, particularly in Mexico, and specifically in the program "Un país de lectores".

    Gates received the 2010 Bower Award for Business Leadership from The Franklin Institute for his achievements at Microsoft and his philanthropic work.

    Also in 2010, Gates was honored with the Silver Buffalo Award by the Boy Scouts of America, its highest award for adults, for his service to youth.

    In 2002, Bill and Melinda Gates received the Jefferson Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged.

    Gates was given the 2006 James C. Morgan Global Humanitarian Award from the Tech Awards.

    In 2015 Gates, along with his wife Melinda, received the Padma Bhushan, India's third-highest civilian award for their social work in the country.


    Barack Obama honored Bill and Melinda Gates with the Presidential Medal of Freedom for their philanthropic efforts in 2016,
 and François Hollande awarded Bill and Melinda in the following year with France's highest national order – as Commander of the Legion of Honour for their charity efforts.

    Entomologists named Bill Gates' flower fly, Eristalis gatesi, in his honor in 1997.


Personal life
Gates and his wife, Melinda, 2009

Gates married Melinda French on a golf course on the Hawaiian island of Lanai on January 1, 1994. They have three children. The family resides in Xanadu 2.0, an earth-sheltered mansion in the side of a hill overlooking Lake Washington in Medina, Washington. In 2009, property taxes on the mansion were reported to be US$1.063 million, on a total assessed value of US$147.5 million.
 The 66,000-square-foot (6,100 m2) estate has a 60-foot (18 m) swimming pool with an underwater music system, as well as a 2,500-square-foot (230 m2) gym and a 1,000-square-foot (93 m2) dining room.


In an interview with Rolling Stone, Gates stated in regard to his faith: "The moral systems of religion, I think, are super important. We've raised our kids in a religious way; they've gone to the Catholic church that Melinda goes to and I participate in. I've been very lucky, and therefore I owe it to try and reduce the inequity in the world. And that's kind of a religious belief. I mean, it's at least a moral belief."


In the same interview, Gates said: "I agree with people like Richard Dawkins that mankind felt the need for creation myths. Before we really began to understand disease and the weather and things like that, we sought false explanations for them. Now science has filled in some of the realm – not all – that religion used to fill. But the mystery and the beauty of the world is overwhelmingly amazing, and there's no scientific explanation of how it came about. To say that it was generated by random numbers, that does seem, you know, sort of an uncharitable view [laughs]. I think it makes sense to believe in God, but exactly what decision in your life you make differently because of it, I don't know."


Gates purchased the Codex Leicester, a collection of scientific writings by Leonardo da Vinci, for US$30.8 million at an auction in 1994.
 Gates is an avid reader, and the ceiling of his large home library is engraved with a quotation from The Great Gatsby.
 Gates also enjoys playing bridge, tennis, and golf.



In 1999, his wealth briefly surpassed US$101 billion.
 Despite his wealth and extensive business travel, Gates usually flew coach in commercial aircraft until 1997, when Gates bought a private jet.
 Since 2000, the nominal value of his Microsoft holdings has declined due to a fall in Microsoft's stock price after the dot-com bubble burst and the multibillion-dollar donations Gates has made to his charitable foundations. In a May 2006 interview, Gates commented that Gates wished that Gates were not the richest man in the world because Gates disliked the attention it brought.
 In March 2010, Gates was the second wealthiest person behind Carlos Slim, but regained the top position in 2013, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires List.

 Slim retook the position again in June 2014

 (but then lost the top position back to Gates). Between 2009 and 2014, his wealth doubled from US$40 billion to more than US$82 billion.
 In October 2017, Gates was surpassed by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos as the richest person in the world.
 On November 15, 2019, Gates once again became the richest person in the world after a 48% increase in Microsoft shares, surpassing Bezos.


Gates has held the top spot on the list of The World's Billionaires for 18 out of the past 23 years.
 Gates has several investments outside Microsoft, which in 2006 paid him a salary of US$616,667 and US$350,000 bonus totalling US$966,667.
 In 1989, Gates founded Corbis, a digital imaging company. In 2004, Gates became a director of Berkshire Hathaway, the investment company headed by long-time friend Warren Buffett.
 In 2016, Gates was discussing his gaming habits when Gates revealed that Gates was color-blind.


In a BBC interview, Gates claimed, "I've paid more tax than any individual ever, and gladly so ... I've paid over $6 billion in taxes."
 Gates is a proponent of higher taxes, particularly for the rich.
 Gates' days are planned for him on a minute-by-minute basis, similar to the U.S. President's schedule.

External business ventures and investments (partial list)
	
This section is in list format, but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this section, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (May 2019)

Gates has a multi-billion dollar investment portfolio with stake in various sectors
 and has participated in several entrepreneurial ventures beyond Microsoft, including:

    AutoNation, automotive retailer that Gates has a 16% stake in trading on the NYSE.
    Bill GatesC3, a new think-tank company founded by Gates.
    Canadian National Railway (CN), a Canadian Class I freight railway. As of 2019, Bill Gates is the largest single shareholder of CN stock.

    Cascade Investment LLC, a private investment and holding company incorporated in the United States, founded and controlled by Bill Gates and headquartered in Kirkland, Washington.
    Corbis, a digital image licensing and rights services company founded by Gates.
    EarthNow, Seattle-based startup company aiming to blanket the Earth with live satellite video coverage. Gates is a large financial backer.
    Eclipse Aviation, a defunct manufacturer of very light jets. Gates was a major stake-holder early on in the project.
    Ecolab, global provider of water, hygiene and energy technologies and services to the food, energy, healthcare, industrial and hospitality markets. Gates increased his stake of 10.8% in Ecolab to 25% in 2012.
    ResearchGate, a social networking site for scientists. Gates participated in a $35 million round of financing along with other investors.

    TerraPower, a nuclear reactor design company founded by Gates.

In media

[relevant? – discuss]
Books

Gates has written two books:

    The Road Ahead, written with Microsoft executive Nathan Myhrvold and journalist Peter Rinearson, was published in November 1995. It summarized the implications of the personal computing revolution and described a future profoundly changed by the arrival of a global information superhighway.
    Business @ the Speed of Thought was published in 1999, and discusses how business and technology are integrated, and shows how digital infrastructures and information networks can help getting an edge on the competition.

Documentary films about Gates
External video The Machine That Changed The World; Interview with Bill Gates, 1990 (raw video), 44:03, Open Vault WGBH


    The Machine That Changed the World (1990)
    Triumph of the Nerds (1996)
    Nerds 2.0.1 (1998)
    Waiting for "Superman" (2010)

    The Virtual Revolution (2010)
    Inside Bill's Brain: Decoding Bill Gates (2019)

Feature films

    1999: Pirates of Silicon Valley, a film which chronicles the rise of Apple and Microsoft from the early 1970s to 1997. Gates is portrayed by Anthony Michael Hall.
    2002: Nothing So Strange, a mocumentary featuring Gates as the subject of a modern assassination. Gates briefly appears at the start, played by Steve Sires.
    2010: The Social Network, a film which chronicles the development of Facebook. Gates is portrayed by Steve Sires.

    2015: Steve Jobs vs. Bill Gates: The Competition to Control the Personal Computer, 1974–1999: Original film from the National Geographic Channel for the American Genius series.


Video and film clips

    1983: Steve Jobs hosts Bill Gates in the Macintosh dating game at the Macintosh pre-launch event (with Steve Jobs and Mitch Kapor, references the television show, The Dating Game)
    2007: Steve Jobs and Bill Gates Together at D5 Conference

Radio

Gates was the guest on BBC Radio 4's Desert Island Discs on January 31, 2016, in which Gates talks about his relationships with his father and Steve Jobs, meeting Melinda Ann French, the start of Microsoft and some of his habits (for example reading The Economist "from cover to cover every week"). His choice of things to take on a desert island were, for music: "Blue Skies" by Willie Nelson; book: The Better Angels of Our Nature by Steven Pinker; and luxury item: a DVD Collection of Lectures from The Teaching Company.

Television

Gates made a guest appearance as himself on the Emmy Award winning TV show, The Big Bang Theory. The episode on which Gates appeared was appropriately entitled, "The Gates Excitation."

See also

    Big History Project
    List of richest Americans in history
    List of wealthiest historical figures

References
Footnotes

Gates regularly documents his share ownership through public U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission form 4 filings.



    His father was named William H. Gates II, but Gates is now generally known as William H. Gates, Senior to avoid confusion with his son.

Citations

"Billionaires #2 Bill Gates". Forbes. March 5, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019.
Manes 1994, p. 11.
"Bill Gates (American computer programmer, businessman, and philanthropist)". Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2013.
Sheridan, Patrick (May 2, 2014). "Bill Gates no longer Microsoft's biggest shareholder". CNN Money. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014.
MSFT (Holdings), NASDAQ, archived from the original on October 19, 2011, retrieved April 10, 2016
MSFT (Symbol), NASDAQ, archived from the original on April 8, 2016, retrieved April 10, 2016
Einstein, David (January 13, 2000). "Gates steps down as Microsoft CEO". forbes.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2016.
"Microsoft Chairman Gates to leave day-to-day role". money.cnn.com. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2016.
"Bill Gates | Development of Information and Knowledge Management". tlu.ee. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2016.
"Bill Gates steps down as chairman, will assist new CEO as 'technology advisor'". The Verge. Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2014.
Lesinski 2006, p. 96; Manes 1994, p. 459.
"Why Putin Isn't on 'Forbes' Billionaires List". Newsweek. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017.
Thibault, Marie (January 19, 2010). "The Next Bill Gates". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2010.
"Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Is The Richest Perosn In The World-Again". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 11, 2018.
Feuerherd, Ben (November 16, 2019). "Bill Gates regains spot as world's richest person over Jeff Bezos". New York Post. Retrieved November 19, 2019.
Neate, Rupert (August 15, 2017). "Bill Gates gives $4.6bn to charity in biggest donation since 2000". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 10, 2018.
"The $600 billion challenge". Fortune. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017.
"Bill Gates Cofounder, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 20, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
"Ancestry of Bill Gates". Wargs. Archived from the original on June 12, 2010. Retrieved June 9, 2010.
"Scottish Americans". Alba West. Archived from the original on May 11, 2008. Retrieved April 29, 2009.
Manes 1994, p. 15.
Leibovich, Mark (December 31, 2000). "Alter Egos". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2019.
Lange, Greg; Stein, Alan (February 14, 1999). "Tornado with 100-m.p.h. winds hits Seattle and Juanita on September 28, 1962". HistoryLink. Retrieved December 18, 2018.
Manes 1994, p. 47.
Lesinski, Jeanne M (September 1, 2008). Bill Gates: Entrepreneur and Philanthropist. Twenty First Century Books. ISBN 9781580135702. Retrieved March 10, 2011.
Lowe, Janet (January 5, 2001). Bill Gates Speaks: Insight from the World's Greatest Entrepreneur. Wiley. ISBN 9780471401698. Retrieved March 10, 2011.
Berkowitz, Edward D (2006). Something Happened: A Political and Cultural Overview of the Seventies. Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231124942. Retrieved March 10, 2011.
Cringely, Robert X. (June 1996). "Part II". Triumph of the Nerds: The Rise of Accidental Empires. Season 1. PBS. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017.
Manes 1994, p. 24.
"Bill Gates | American computer programmer, businessman, and philanthropist". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
Manes 1994, p. 27.
Gates 1996, p. 12.
Manes 1994, p. 34.
Paul Allen spills the beans on Gates' criminal past, UK, V3, archived from the original on March 12, 2013
"Remarks by Bill Gates, co-chair", Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation – Press Room, Speeches, archived from the original on July 3, 2013, retrieved July 13, 2013
Gates 1996, p. 14.
Michael A. Schuman (2008). Bill Gates: Computer Mogul and Philanthropist. Enslow Publishers, Inc. p. 34. ISBN 978076602693-3.
Marcie Sims (February 9, 2018). Capitol Hill Pages: Young Witnesses to 200 Years of History. McFarland. p. 196. ISBN 9781476669724.
"National Merit Scholarship Corporation – Scholars You May Know". nationalmerit.org. Archived from the original on February 28, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
"The new—and improved?—SAT". The Week Magazine. Archived from the original on May 10, 2006. Retrieved May 23, 2006.
Gates 1996, p. 15.
"Timeline: Bill Gates: 1973; from google (bill gates major in harvard) result 3". Archived from the original on October 5, 2015.
Michael Hitt; R. Duane Ireland; Robert Hoskisson (January 1, 2012). Strategic Management: Concepts and Cases: Competitiveness and Globalization. p. 263. ISBN 9781111825874. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
Kestenbaum, David (July 4, 2008). "Before Microsoft, Gates Solved A Pancake Problem". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011.
"UT Dallas Team Bests Young Bill Gates With Improved Answer to So-Called Pancake Problem in Mathematics". University of Texas at Dallas. September 17, 2008. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010.
Gates, William; Papadimitriou, Christos (1979). "Bounds for sorting by prefix reversal". Discrete Mathematics. 27: 47–57. doi:10.1016/0012-365X(79)90068-2.
Gates 1996, p. 19.
Wallace 1993, p. 59.
Gates 1996, p. 18.
The History of Microsoft – 1976 Archived February 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine: Bill Gates explaining that his departure from Harvard was reversible if Microsoft had failed.
"Microsoft Visitor Center Student Information: Key Events in Microsoft History". Microsoft. Archived from the original (.DOC) on February 26, 2008. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
"Microsoft history". The History of Computing Project. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Manes 1994, p. 81.
Gates, William 'Bill' (October 13, 2005). Remarks (Speech). Waterloo, ON. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Bunnell, David (February–March 1982). "The Man Behind The Machine?". PC Magazine (interview). p. 16. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2012.
Gordon, John Steele; Maiello, Michael (December 23, 2002). "Pioneers Die Broke". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 29, 2006. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
"Father of DOS". Paterson Technology. Retrieved October 13, 2019.
"The Roots of DOS". Paterson Technology. Retrieved October 13, 2019.
Gates 1996, p. 54.
Manes 1994, p. 193.
Paul Allen (May 2011). "Microsoft's Odd Couple". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 11, 2019.
Detrick, Hallie (October 16, 2018). "Bill Gates Mourns His Microsoft Co-Founder Paul Allen: 'Personal Computing Would Not Have Existed Without Him'". Fortune. Retrieved November 11, 2019.
"Challenges and Strategy" (PDF). Groklaw. Retrieved November 17, 2011.
Freiberger, Paul (August 31, 1981). "Bugs in Radio Shack TRS-80 Model III: How Bad Are They?". InfoWorld. p. 49. Archived from the original on September 2, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2011.
Thorlin, Fred (April 2000). "Fred Thorlin: The Big Boss at Atari Program Exchange" (Interview). Interviewed by Kevin Savetz. Atari archives. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2012.
Rensin, David (1994). "The Bill Gates Interview". Playboy.
Ballmer, Steve (October 9, 1997). "Steve Ballmer Speech Transcript – Church Hill Club". Microsoft. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Isaacson, Walter (January 13, 1997). "The Gates Operating System". Time. Archived from the original on June 19, 2000. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Bank, David (February 1, 1999). "Breaking Windows". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Chapman, Glenn (June 27, 2008). "Bill Gates Signs Off". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on June 30, 2008.
Gates, Bill (September 26, 1997). Remarks by Bill Gates (Speech). San Diego. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Herbold, Robert (2004). The Fiefdom Syndrome: The Turf Battles That Undermine Careers and Companies – And How to Overcome Them. ISBN 0-385-51067-5.
Gates, Bill. "Bill Gates Interview". Transcript of a Video History Interview / Computer History Collection (Interview). Interviewed by David Allison. National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
Pournelle, Jerry (September 1985). "PCs, Peripherals, Programs, and People". BYTE. p. 347. Retrieved March 20, 2016.
"Microsoft Announces Plans for July 2008 Transition for Bill Gates". Microsoft. June 15, 2006. Archived from the original on June 19, 2006.
Wasserman, Elizabeth (November 17, 1998). "Gates deposition makes judge laugh in court". CNN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
"Microsoft's Teflon Bill". BusinessWeek. November 30, 1998. Archived from the original on April 7, 2008. Retrieved March 30, 2008.
Heilemann, John (November 1, 2000). "The Truth, The Whole Truth, and Nothing But The Truth". Wired. 8 (11). Archived from the original on May 28, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Matthew G. Miller; Peter Newcomb (January 2, 2014). "Billionaires Worth $3.7 Trillion Surge as Gates Wins 2013". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on January 3, 2014. Retrieved January 3, 2014.
"Microsoft names Satya Nadella to replace Steve Ballmer". BBC News. February 4, 2014. Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2014.
Jeff Goodell (March 13, 2014). "Bill Gates: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Jann S. Wenner. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2014.
Mack, Eric (January 28, 2015). "Bill Gates Says You Should Worry About Artificial Intelligence". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015. Retrieved February 19, 2015.
Lumby, Andrew (January 28, 2015). "Bill Gates Is Worried About the Rise of the Machines". The Fiscal Times. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015. Retrieved February 19, 2015.
Holley, Peter (March 24, 2015). "Apple co-founder on artificial intelligence: 'The future is scary and very bad for people'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015.
"Permalink to an answer from "Hi Reddit, I'm Bill Gates and I'm back for my third AMA. Ask me anything. • /r/IAmA"". reddit. Retrieved June 10, 2015.
"Baidu CEO Robin Li interviews Bill Gates and Elon Musk at the Boao Forum, March 29, 2015". YouTube. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015.
"Saudi Crown Prince and Bill Gates review joint development projects ". Al Arabiya. March 31, 2018.
"Prince Mohammed books out hotel to dine with Murdoch". The Sydney Morning Herald. April 4, 2018.
"Bill Gates reveals the 'biggest mistake' Gates made at Microsoft". livemint. June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019.
Bloomberg New Economy Forum Advisory Board
"Gates foundation". Archived from the original on May 23, 2012.
Robin Toal (September 16, 2013). "The Top Ten US Charitable Foundations". Funds For NGOs. Funds For NGOs, LLC. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
Cronin, Jon (January 25, 2005). "Bill Gates: billionaire philanthropist". BBC News. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved April 1, 2008.
"Our Approach to Giving". Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Archived from the original on April 4, 2008. Retrieved April 1, 2008.
"Bill Gates - Carnegie Mellon University". Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved January 27, 2019.
University, Carnegie Mellon. "Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Builds Carnegie Mellon's Home for Computer Science - Engage with CMU - Carnegie Mellon University". cmu.edu. Retrieved January 27, 2019.
"2005 Annual Report" (PDF). Rockefeller Brothers Fund. January 1, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 16, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2008.
"The 50 most generous Americans". Archived from the original on February 22, 2012.
"Bill and Melinda Gates give 95% of wealth to charity". BBC News. October 18, 2010. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011.
"What We Do". Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 2014. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
"Agricultural Development Golden Rice". Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2016.
https://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Family-Planning
Bina Abraham (October 1, 2010). "They half it in them". Gulf News. Archived from the original on January 21, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2011.
Moss, Rosabeth (December 14, 2010). "Four Strategic Generosity Lessons". Business Week. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2011.
"40 billionaires pledge to give away half of wealth". Retrieved August 8, 2010.
Robyn Griggs Lawrence (February 22, 2011). "A Rich Gift: Homemade Jelly for Bill and Melinda Gates". Mother Earth News. Archived from the original on February 24, 2011. Retrieved March 10, 2011.
Matthew G.H. Chun (April 14, 1999). "Bill Gates Donates $20 million to MIT". The Harvard Crimson. The Harvard Crimson, Inc. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
"Our Campus – Teaching, research, and administrative spaces". Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. President and Fellows of Harvard College. 2014. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
"Gates Computer Science Building". Stanford Engineering. Stanford University. 2014. Archived from the original on April 1, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014.
"Bill Gates". Facebook. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
Kass, Jason (November 18, 2013). "Bill Gates Can't Build a Toilet". New York Times Opinion Pages. New York Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015.
"BBC news article "Bill Gates drinks water distilled from human faeces"". BBC News. January 7, 2015. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved January 11, 2015.
"From poop to portable, This Ingenious Machine Turns Feces into Drinking Water". gatesnotes, The Blog of Bill Gates. January 5, 2015. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015.
"Bill Gates and Jimmy Drink Poop Water". Youtube Channel of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. January 22, 2015. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015.
"Bill Gates makes $100 million personal investment to fight Alzheimer's". Reuters. November 13, 2017. Archived from the original on November 13, 2017. Retrieved November 13, 2017.
"Briefly Noted | Excellence in Philanthropy | The Philanthropy Roundtable". philanthropyroundtable.org. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016.
"Bill Gates follows Thalapathy Vijay's unique way to help Kerala flood victims - Tamil Movie News - IndiaGlitz.com". IndiaGlitz.com. Retrieved August 25, 2018.
"Dark butt over good works of Gates Foundation". Los Angeles Times. January 7, 2007. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008., Los Angeles Times, January 7, 2006.
Heim, Kristi (January 10, 2007). "Gates Foundation to review investments". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 16, 2007., The Seattle Times, January 10, 2007.
Gates Foundation to maintain its investment plan, The Austin Statesman, January 14, 2007.[dead link]
"Lefever, Ernest W. (November 1, 1999). "Bill Gates' 'Diversity' Subverts Merit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012.", Los Angeles Times, November 1, 1999
""The Gates Millennium Scholars program". Archived from the original on January 15, 2013."
"Bill Gates faces circumcision protest". Vancouver 24 hrs. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
Andy Coghlan. "Bill Gates helps fund mass circumcision programme". New Scientist. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.
"Live blog: Bill Gates and Roger Federer play tennis for charity in Seattle". April 30, 2017. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017.
"Match For Africa 4 a Huge Hit for Federer's Foundation". Tennis.com. Retrieved May 16, 2018.
"Roger Federer's Match For Africa Raises More Than $2.5 Million". Tennis.com. Retrieved May 16, 2018.
see Forbes World's Richest People 1996, 1997, and 1998
Wahba, Phil (September 17, 2008). "Bill Gates tops US wealth list 15 years continuously". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved November 6, 2008.
Kirsch, Noah. "Here's Why Jeff Bezos Is Not Truly The Richest Person In History". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 11, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2018.
Lesinski 2006, p. 102
Cowley, Jason (June 22, 2006). "Heroes of our time – the top 50". New Statesman. UK. Archived from the original on December 31, 2007. Retrieved February 17, 2008.
"Gates 'second only to Blair'". BBC News. September 26, 1999. Archived from the original on December 29, 2008. Retrieved March 30, 2008.
"Mr. William H. Gates, III". National Academy of Engineering. Retrieved June 12, 2019.
American Library Association. Honorary Membership.
Xiang, Bo (November 27, 2017). "Bill Gates elected to Chinese Academy of Engineering". Xinhua. Retrieved June 10, 2019.
"The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. December 5, 2012. Archived from the original on December 30, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2013.
"The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. November 2, 2011. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2013.
"Bill Gates Speaks of Opportunities and Challenges Facing "Generation I"". News Center. Microsoft. October 28, 1999. Archived from the original on December 31, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
"Eredoctoraat Universiteit Nyenrode voor Wim Kok" (Press release) (in Dutch). Nyenrode Business Universiteit. August 13, 2003. Archived from the original on February 18, 2008. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
"Honorary doctors at KTH". About KTH. Stockholm: KTH Royal Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
History of the University - website of the Waseda University
"Bill Gates Awarded Honorary Doctorate of Tsinghua". Tsinghua University. April 19, 2007. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2010.
Hughes, Gina (June 8, 2007). "Bill Gates Gets Degree After 30 Years". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
"Karolinska Institutet Medicine hedersdoktorer 1910‐2013" [Honorary doctors of medicine at the Karolinska Institute 1910–2013] (PDF) (in Swedish). Karolinska Institutet. May 22, 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015.
University of Cambridge (June 12, 2009). "The Chancellor in Cambridge to confer Honorary Degrees". University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on August 17, 2009. Retrieved August 20, 2009.
Blakely, Rhys (July 18, 2007). "Gates how piracy worked for me in China". The Times. London. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
"Knighthood for Microsoft's Gates". BBC News. March 2, 2005. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
"Proclamation of the Award". Diario Oficial de la Federación. Archived from the original on March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 30, 2008.
"Bower Award for Business Leadership". The Franklin Institute. 2010. Archived from the original on July 26, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2013.
"2010 Silver Buffalo Recipients". Scouting: 39. September–October 2010.
National Winners | public service awards Archived November 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Jefferson Awards.org. Retrieved on September 4, 2013.
"The 2006 James C. Morgan Global Humanitarian Award". The Tech Museum of Innovation. Archived from the original on April 2, 2014. Retrieved April 2, 2014.
"Padma Awards – Press Information Board of India". Ministry of Home Affairs, India. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015.
"Padma awards 2015 announced: Advani, Amitabh among 104 awardees". Zee News. January 25, 2015.
"President Obama Names Recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom". whitehouse.gov. The White House. November 16, 2016. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 16, 2016.
Ambassade de France aux Etats-Unis – Washington, D.C. (April 21, 2017). "Bill et Melinda Gates décorés de la Légion d'Honneur" [Bill and Melinda Gates awarded the Legion of Honor]. France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, D.C. (in French). Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018.
Thompson, F. Christian (August 19, 1999). "Bill Gates' Flower Fly Eristalis gatesi Thompson". The Diptera Site. Archived from the original on February 12, 2008. Retrieved February 18, 2008.
Anderson, Rick (May 16, 2008). "Taxman Cometh". Seattle Weekly. Archived from the original on April 17, 2013.
"coverage of the Gates' Medina, Washington estate". Forbes. May 22, 2002. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved June 9, 2010.
Goodell, Jeff (March 27, 2014). "Bill Gates: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2014.
Lesinski 2006, p. 74
Paterson, Thane (June 13, 2000). ""He had come a long way to this blue lawn and his dream must have seemed so close Gates could hardly fail to grasp it"-FSF (Advice for Bill Gates: A Little Culture Wouldn't Hurt)". Business Week. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008.
"Bill Gates: Chairman". Microsoft Corporation. 2008. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008.
"Profile: Bill Gates". BBC news. January 26, 2004. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved January 1, 2010.
Fridson 2001, p. 113
Zuckerman, Laurence (October 27, 1997). "New Jet Eases Travel Hassles For Bill Gates". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012.
Bolger, Joe (May 5, 2006). "I wish I was not the richest man in the world, says Bill Gates". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on September 23, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Cuadros, Alex; Harrison, Crayton (May 17, 2013). "Bill Gates Retakes World's Richest Title From Carlos Slim". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2013.
"Bill Gates regains world's richest man title: Forbes". The Times of India. March 3, 2014. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016.
"Forbes Billionaires list". Archived from the original on December 3, 2011.
Estevez, Dolia (June 7, 2014). "Mexico's Carlos Slim Reclaims World's Richest Man Title From Bill Gates". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 1, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2014.
"The World's Billionaires". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 30, 2014.
"Bill Gates". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved August 25, 2017.
"Microsoft 2006 Proxy Statement". Microsoft. October 6, 2007. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2008.
Fried, Ina (December 14, 2004). "Gates joins board of Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway". CNET. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2008.
Alex Osborn (February 18, 2016). "This Was Bill Gates' Favorite XBLA Game". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016.
"Newsnight Interview". BBC. January 24, 2014. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
"US Should Pay More Tax". ABC. May 28, 2013. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017.
Mary Riddell (October 21, 2016). "Bill Gates: Gates eats Big Macs for lunch and schedules every minute of his day – meet the man worth $80 billion". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on October 24, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2016.
Edwards, John (June 25, 2019). "This is What Bill Gates's Portfolio Looks Like". Investopedia. Retrieved November 17, 2019.
"Bill Gates now biggest CN shareholder (CA;CNR)". CBC News. April 25, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2019.
Levy, Jared Ari (June 4, 2013). "Bill Gates Joins $35 Million Funding in Startup ResearchGate". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2015.
"Machine That Changed The World, The; Interview with Bill Gates, 1990 (raw video)". WGBH Open Vault. 1990. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2016.
"Bill Gates Goes to Sundance, Offers an Education". ABC News. January 23, 2010. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010.
"'Bogus Bill' has a blast playing billionaire in 'The Social Network'". KVAL 13. Archived from the original on July 30, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015.
"American Genius". Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015.
"BBC Radio 4 – Desert Island Discs, Bill Gates". BBC. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.

    Lerman, Rachel (March 27, 2018). "Bill Gates to guest star on geeky 'The Big Bang Theory'". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 25, 2019.

Bibliography

    Fridson, Martin (2001). How to Be a Billionaire: Proven Strategies from the Titans of Wealth. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-41617-7.
    Gates, Bill (1996). The Road Ahead. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-026040-4.
    Lesinski, Jeanne M. (2006). Bill Gates (biography). A&E Television Networks. ISBN 0-8225-7027-0.
    Manes, Stephen (1994). Gates: How Microsoft's Mogul Reinvented an Industry and Made Himself The Richest Man in America. Touchstone Pictures. ISBN 0-671-88074-8.
    Wallace, James (1993). Hard Drive: Bill Gates and the Making of the Microsoft Empire. New York City: HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 0-471-56886-4.

Further reading

    Bank, David (2001). Breaking Windows: how Bill Gates fumbled the future of Microsoft. New York City: Free Press. ISBN 0-7432-0315-1.
    Rivlin, Gary (1999). The plot to get Bill Gates: an irreverent investigation of the world's richest man... and the people who hate him. New York City: Times Business. ISBN 0-8129-3006-1.
    "83 Reasons Why Bill Gates's Reign Is Over". Wired. 6 (12). December 1998. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010.
    Kildall, Gary (October 25, 2004). "The Man Who Could Have Been Bill Gates". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on April 4, 2006. Retrieved June 9, 2010.
    "The Meaning of Bill Gates: As his reign at Microsoft comes to an end, so does the era Gates dominated", The Economist, June 28, 2008.
    Wallace, James. Overdrive: Bill Gates and the race to control cyberspace (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1997).

Primary sources

    Gates, Bill. "An exclusive interview with Bill Gates." Financial Times 1 (2013). online
    Gates, Bill. "Remarks of Bill Gates, Harvard Commencement 2007." Harvard Gazette 7 (2007). online
    Kinsley, Michael, and Conor Clarke, eds. Creative capitalism: A conversation with Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and other economic leaders (Simon and Schuster, 2009).

INTERIEW
Bill Gates Interview
NATIONAL MUSEUM
OF AMERICAN HISTORY

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION Transcript of a Video History Interview with Mr. William "Bill" Gates

Winner of the 1993 Price Waterhouse Leadership Award
for Lifetime Achievement, Computerworld Smithsonian Awards
Interviewer: David Allison (DA)
Division of Computers, Information, & Society
National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution

Location: Microsoft Corporation, Bellevue, Washington

TABLE OF CONTENTS

    Family Background
    School Experiences
    Importance of Extra Curricular Activities
    Experiences with the PDP-10
    Creating Traf-O-Data
    Using an 8008 Processor
    Working for TRW
    Importance of the Microprocessor
    College Plans
    Discovery of Altair
    Writing an Altair Basic
    Testing the Basic
    Joining the PC Revolution
    Expanding Customers Beyond MITS
    Microsoft as a Separate Company
    Running Basic on an Altair
    The IMSAI Computer
    The People who formed Microsoft
    Early Microsoft Culture
    Basic for Other Early PC's
    What Distinguished Microsoft Basic
    Running Microsoft Multiplan
    Defining Microsoft Corporate Strategy
    Move to the Business Market
    Keeping up with the Industry
    Growth of Microsoft
    Character of People Recruited
    The Move to Seattle
    The 'Microsoft Way'
    Early Failures--and Lessons
    Relations with Paul Allen and Steve Ballmer
    Mazuhiko Nishi
    Vision for Spread of Personal Computers
    Keeping up with the Comptetition
    The TRS-80 Model 100
    End of First Phase of PC History
    The Altair Basic Paper Tape
    Holding the Beginning of Microsoft in his Hands
    Advent of the IBM-PC
    IBM-PC Design and Development Issues
    Switch from CP/M to DOS
    Features of Microsoft DOS
    Development of Microsoft Word
    Microsoft and the Mouse
    IBM-PC Compatible Explosion
    Relationship Between Microsoft and Apple
    Builing the Corporate Campus
    Going Public
    Microsoft's Growth
    A Changing Culture
    The Business of the AT
    Continuing Business Expansion
    Challenges of the Windows Interface
    Moving to the 386
    Battle Between OS/2 and Windows
    Growing Windows
    Responding to Networks
    Pushing Towards Multimedia
    Directions of Windows NT
    Workgroup Computing
    Computers and Societal Transformation
    The Future of Computing
    Scary Developments
    New Corporate Branches
    Closing Thoughts

Family Background

David Allison (DA): We thought we'd start talking about your family. Tell me some of the qualities that you attribute to your family that later shaped your career at Microsoft.

Bill Gates (Bill Gates): My dad was a lawyer and my mom was very involved in business activities as a board member in non-profit organizations like running United Way Campaigns. She was the Director of the University of Washington, banks, that kind of thing. They shared what they were doing out in the world with my older sister and I as we were growing up. So, we always had a sense of, "Okay, this is the Governor coming to dinner, or here is this political campaign, let's get involved in this." I was a page down in the State Capitol of Olympia, Washington. Then I went out and spent some time being a page back in Washington, DC. I understood about contracts and things. I was interested in the business world, reading about it all the time. Sort of always playing around with the idea of "What would I end up eventually doing?"

TO CONTENTS

School Experiences

DA: Were other of your contemporaries equally interested in the business, or did you find yourself unusual among the groups?

Bill Gates: Well, when I went to Lakeside School, I was about 12 years old. I started there in seventh grade. That was kind of a change for me. It is a private boys' school. Very strict. At first I really didn't like the environment. I did eventually find some friends there, some of who had the same sort of interest, like reading business magazines and Fortune. We were always creating funny company names and having people send us their product literature[laughs]. Trying to think about how business worked. And in particular, looking at computer companies and what was going on with them.

DA: What companies, in particular, did you like to follow?

Bill Gates: The first computer we used was a GE time-sharing system. It was connected over a phone line. Actually, the school couldn't afford a full phone line, so someone in the offices had a switch where you could take over the phone line. It was an ASR-33 Teletype with paper tape connected up to a GE computer. But, very quickly, we found out about PDP-8s, and eventually got one loaned to us. And then eventually, Data General Nova got loaned to us. So, it these companies making smaller computers that were very fascinating to us. Joining all the user groups. DEC had one called the DECUS User Group. Getting on every mailing list. In Datamation they had these bingo cards where you could check everything you were interested in. So, we just put our name down and checked everything in there and tried to learn about the world of computing.

DA: How did the faculty respond to your interest outside of your curriculum compared to your interest in your own studies?

Bill Gates: Well, I was relieved from some classes, Math in particular, because I'd read ahead. So, I had quite a bit of free time. So, when the Mother's Club which did this rummage sale, got the money for this Teletype and a certain amount of time to buy computer time, it was a question of who was going to figure this thing out? Now, I was very young. I was in eighth grade and some of the older students kind of barged in and thought they could figure it out. And very quickly, the teachers were intimidated. So, it was sort of a group of students reading the manuals and trying things out.

You would type the programs off-line on this yellow paper tape and then put it into the tape reader, dial up the computer, and very quickly feedin the paper tape and run your program. They charged you not only for the connect time, but also for storage units and CPU time. So, if you had a program that had a loop in it of some type you could spend a lot of money very quickly. And so we went through the money that the Mothers Club had given very rapidly. It was a little awkward for the teachers, because it was just students sitting there and zoom! -- the money was gone.

I wrote a tic-tac-toe program and a couple of other base conversion programs. It was the BASIC language running on this GE system. So, people didn't know what to think because teachers were fairly dignified in those days and usually were supposed to know what was going on. They were okay about it, but then when the money was gone, they had to start billing us for all of our usage. We had these kind of funny student checking accounts so my friends and I still stayed very active. We were kind of desperate to get free computer time one way or another.

The amount of time we'd spend in this particular room that had the Teletype was quite extreme. We sort of took over the room, myself and two other people. They called it the �Teletype Room�. We were always coming up with schemes to get free computer time, and eventually did with a local company. Convinced them that because they had a deal with DEC for this big computer, an early PDP-10, serial number 36, that if they could find problems with it they wouldn't have to pay their rent. Having a few of the students, including me, bang on it and try to find bugs seemed like a good idea. And particularly, let us do that mostly at night. So, we were going down to this ... it was called Computer Center Corporation, C-Cubed, in the University District, staffed by some old people from the University of Washington Academic Computing Center had gone over there. So, for a few years that is where I spent my time. I'd skip out on athletics and go down to this computer center. We were moving ahead very rapidly: BASIC, FORTRAN, LISP, PDP-10 machine language, digging out the operating system listings from the trash and studying those. Really not just banging away to find bugs like monkeys[laughs], but actually studying the code to see what was wrong. The teachers thought we were quite unusual. And pretty quickly there were four of us who got more addicted, more involved, and understood it better than the others. And those were myself, Paul Allen, who later founded Microsoft with me, Ric Weiland, who actually worked at Microsoft in the early days, and Kent Evans, who was my closest friend, and most my age, was killed in a mountain climbing accident when I was in 11th grade in high school. So, the four of us became the Lakeside Programming Group. We were the hard-core users.

TO CONTENTS

Importance of Extra Curricular Activities

DA: Clearly, your extracurricular activity was probably more important in your later development than what you did in class, or at least equally important [Bill laughs]. How do you feel as we look at problems in education, that students that are coming up interested in technical things should balance those. Do you think it is important to explore things on your own at that age?

Bill Gates: Self-exploration is great, because you develop a sense of self-confidence and an identity of "Hey, I know this pretty well. I know this better than the teachers. Let me try and see if I can understand at the next level. Maybe I'm pretty good at this stuff." And particularly with the computer where if your program is wrong, you know you try it and if it doesn't work and then you fix it and try it again. It is kind of a feedback loop, which because the classroom has a lot of people, and maybe there is not a subject that you think you are good at or interested at. It is just fascinating to try and figure out the computer.

I remember at Computer Center Corporation they had hired in some of the great people of early computer days, including Bob Gruen, Dick Russell, a guy named Weir who was a Stanford guy. Anyway, these guys would kind of loan us deep manuals on the system, just for a few hours and then take them away. So, we'd spend those few hours just reading carefully. It was so exciting to get a little glimpse and beginning to figure out how computers were built, and why they were expensive. I certainly think that having some dimension, when you're young, that you feel a mastery of, versus the other people around you is a very positive thing. And for me that came in several ways: the reading I was doing non-computer related; in Math. But computers, timewise, for many years was a key center of excitement.

TO CONTENTS

Experiences with the PDP-10

DA: You mentioned the PDP-10 as a computer that was important to you. In what ways do you think working with that particular machine set you up for the kind of developments that you did later?

Bill Gates: DEC always named their computers PDP, Programmable Data Processor. It is actually funny, because they kind of skip numbers. PDP-1 was their first. And it is kind of strange, I did a lot of work on the PDP-1, but not until I got to Harvard, late in my career. They had so few computers there, a couple of really decrepit PDP-1s hanging around were the best graphics display machines. Anyway, the PDP-10 which whose predecessor was the PDP-6 very similar and and later called the PDP-20 or DEC 20, and was, in a sense, the first time-sharing system. It was written, well, it was the first...I don't know how they said that? It was DEC's first time-sharing system, in any case. And it was a very good time-sharing system. That means that you could have lots of people working at the same time sharing the storages and the CPU.

It is kind of ludicrous today because the speed of that machine is so much less than these Pcs. [Bill gestures to PCs set up in interview room] To think that it was so expensive that we all had to share it and how slow things were. I mean, connecting up to these computers ... these Teletypes, the print head only moved at 110 baud, which is about ten characters per second. There was no lower case. And one day at this Computer Center they brought in a GE Terminate terminal. It was an absolute, incredible breakthrough, because it printed 30 characters per second. It was just incredible! [Bill imitates sounds of Teletype] We'd all just sit there and watch it. And even more fantastic was that it had lower case letters. So, you could do real correspondence and things like that.

PDP-10 today is considered kind of a strange machine because it was 36-bit with these 18-bit addresses. You used octal instead of instead of hex because having a word size that breaks into 18 by 18 that's not multiples of four. Anyway, DEC always used hex, because PDP-1 from the beginning was actually an 18-bit machine, although their later machines of great success were the PDP-11 was 16-bit and VAX and its successors were 32-bit machines. In any case, the PDP-10 was an exciting machine to be involved with because a lot of university campuses were getting these things and doing time-sharing. It was being used in a lot of new applications. And DEC was very much the up and coming company in computers. People were doing great peripherals to hook-up to these things. They were doing some awfully good system software.

The BASIC they did which we got ahold of the BASIC source code and enhanced t quite a bit was great. They had AID and FORTRAN. They didn't have a very good COBOL until a little bit later on. But it was a very solid time-sharing system. Lots of great experimentation going on with it.

TO CONTENTS

Creating Traf-O-Data

DA: One last thing I wanted to ask you before we talk about the Altair. In addition to having this intense interest in computing, you maintained an interest in business in this early period at Lakeside and actually began a business. Would you talk a little bit about Traf-O-Data and some of the other entrepreneurial activities that you did?

Bill Gates: Well, there was the interest in the technology and also the business together. The two sort of went together. When we wanted to get free computer time, you had to have a sense of how you could motivate people to give you free computer time. With C-Cubed, that meant just finding bugs for them. Eventually, DEC made them pay for the machine. But we had been deemed useful enough by them, and although they didn't pay us, they gave us free time. That company went bankrupt. Then we found a company down in Portland, Oregon with the same PDP-10 that let us write a COBOL program, a payroll program, a huge complex payroll program. I learned about labor reports, taxes, and all sorts of mundane things. We called this group the "Lakeside Programming Group." And Paul really got interested in the machine. And Ric Weiland got interested in writing an Editor. So the two younger members of the team ended up doing most of the work on this payroll program.

In fact, they thought there wasn't enough work to go around, so they kicked me off. I said, "Look, if you want me to come back you have to let me be in charge. But this is a dangerous thing, because if you put me in charge this time, I'm going to want to be in charge forever after." Which in high school, when you are two years behind, it was considered a reasonably uppity thing. So, they brought me back in. And we got the payroll program done. We got a lot of free computer time. During all this time we were helping this school with its scheduling. It's kind of a long story, but they got it all screwed up. They used an approach that we had not recommended. And, eventually, they had to turn it over to us. So to be a student and being determining who's in what classes and when they meet. The school paid us pretty well. We actually used the computer time we had to do that. That worked out great. We bought some equipment from a bankrupt computer company, some DEC tapes and made money on that [laughs].

Traf-O-Data was taking road volume data and converting it into reports where you have actually just a 16-channel paper tape on the side of the road. The pressure sensitive hose that you drive over has a counter in there clicking out a count every five, ten, or fifteen minutes. Those have to be processed for the State Road Departments, to give out money for repairs, and decide how to do traffic lights, etc. Anyway, it was data that needed to be processed. So, we got involved in that.

TO CONTENTS

Using an 8008 Processor

We were truly naive in that we built a machine using the very first decent microprocessor, the 8008. I funded that development and wrote some of the software. And Paul Allen and another hardware person, Paul Gilbert, who knew how to do crazy wire wrapping, took these very tiny Intel memory chips -- I forget if they were 256-bit or 1K-bit, -- I think 1K-bit Intel chips in this 8008 and created a system and we did special software. 8008 wasn't capable of running a BASIC Interpreter. That had always been my Holy Grail because I had played around writing a little bit of a BASIC Interpreter on a PDP-8, and a Data General machine. But the 8008 is basically an 8-bit machine with no programmable stack. Doing this traffic analysis software was pushing the limits. Anyway, we were making machines and we thought we'd sell them to people. But, when the guy from the County that Seattle's in came to see it, it didn't work. We ended up being okay successful, not seriously successful [laughs], just by processing the tapes. At first that was a very manual process. Then we used this prototype machine that we built to do that. So, we made a little bit of money and had some fun with it.

TO CONTENTS

Working for TRW

I was definitely always pushing us out into those frontiers of "What should we do?" Even so, I never had this image that I'd end up being in computers. I didn't think computer people were mainstream or very interesting in certain ways. So, I took my first job where I took off part of my senior year in high school and worked for TRW, who was doing an awesome project using PDP-10s. Even then I was thinking, "Okay I'm going to go to college and do a normal career." In fact, it was very exciting when I was taking this time off, I got my college acceptances. So, I could just work hard on this. This was a real-time data project, controlling the power grid in the Northwest using PDP-10s. It had reliability requirements way beyond what the PDP-10 could deliver. So, we were really trying to push the state-of-the-art -- really pushing the state-of-the-art. It never met the full power industry requirements, but they did put the system on-line. And even at that point we'd thought, "Wow, this microprocessor is going to do something incredible.�

TO CONTENTS

Importance of the Microprocessor

As early as 1971, Paul and I had talked about the microprocessor. And it was really his insight that because of semi-conductor improvements, things would just keep getting better. I said to him, "Oh, exponential phenomena is pretty rare, pretty dramatic. Are you serious about this? Because this means, in effect, we can think of computing as free." It is a gross exaggeration, but it is probably the easiest way to understand what it means to cut cost like that. And Paul was quite convinced of that. So I would sort of say to Paul, "Well, you know what that means?" And he'd say, "Yeah, that is what it means." It is kind of fun to know this, and think, gosh, how are companies going to react, how are they going to respond to something that phenomenal? The early days were very slow moving, though. By the time I went to Harvard, all there was was the 8008 chip. And the 8080 was just coming out, which was the first good general purpose microprocessor chip that Intel was coming out with.

TO CONTENTS

College Plans

DA: We are going to talk a little bit about your transition into Harvard before you got to the Altair. You mentioned that even though you worked in computing, that it wasn't your goal when you went to college. Do you want to say what your goal was?

Bill Gates: That's right. I finished up at TRW, went back, and graduated from Lakeside School. I picked, out of the schools I'd been accepted to, to go back to Harvard. They seemed to have a lot of different things. I knew that if I wanted to be a Lawyer or a Mathematician, Harvard had good courses for these things. Once I got there, I thought Economics was pretty interesting. And I felt that I understood computers well enough, that I really didn't need to hang out with a computer crowd there, because they weren't as interesting. I did end up taking a few computer courses. But most of what I did was not related to computers. And meanwhile, Paul Allen, who had worked with me on everything, basically[chuckles], and who shared this idea that we should go do a company -- Gates actually tried to convince me after TRW that we should start a company then, and try to build PDP-8-like systems around 8080 chips. But it just was too vague and my parents wanted me to go back to school.

So, I went back there. But Paul was there and we were always talking about, "Could we stick a lot of microprocessors together to do something powerful? Could we do a 360 emulator using micro controllers? Could we do a time-sharing system where lots of people could dial-in and get consumer information?" A lot of different ideas.

TO CONTENTS

Discovery of Altair

But a major milestone for us was when we were walking through Harvard Square, one time, and saw this Popular Electronics magazine. And it was kind of in a way, good news and bad news. Here was someone making a computer around this chip in exactly the way that Paul had talked to me, and we'd thought about what kind of software could be done for it, and it was happening without us. And for all we knew maybe they had some software people, they were just going to go charge off and do this thing.

TO CONTENTS

Writing an Altair Basic

So, we wrote this company immediately. Sent them a letter. We have a copy of that somewhere. But anyway, a letter on Traf-O-Data's stationary, because it was the only stationery we had. We offered to do a BASIC for them. And they thought that was interesting. They called back and said, "Well, you're serious? We have a lot of strange people calling us."

This article received immense interest. I mean the idea of a kit computer -- even though there was really nothing you could do with it. There was no Teletype hook-up in the early days, there was no software for it. All you could do was use these switches, key things in into this front panel and maybe do a little program that does things in the lights. Or, actually, a guy name Steve Dompier discovered it, because this bus is unterminated, if you are very clever about the program you run, you can get high-frequency emission that can cause a radio to make interesting noises. Now, eventually, we did get controllers for Teletypes and cassette tapes and floppy disks, that kind of thing. But, in the early days it was pretty useless. People just bought it thinking that it would be neat to build a computer.

DA: I want to hone in on this idea of your proposing that you would actually write BASIC for this machine. It is kind of a gutsy thing to do. Did you feel about it as being boastful, or did you really think you could deliver? Did you think they'd take you up on the offer?

Bill Gates: Well, I had no doubt that I could write a BASIC Interpreter. I thought through in my head all the things that I hadn't done before on those mini-computers. Doing things really small, fascinated me. These machines, you could actually buy it with no memory card. After we got there a lot of people were calling up asking, "What do they do with it?" Well, if you don't buy a memory card you can't do anything. But, the memory cards were 1K. So, if you bought four of those you could have a 4K machine. 4K bytes. And I thought I could do a pretty decent BASIC. Fitting the BASIC in, allowing you to have both your program and your data storage in 4K bytes. That was going to be hard. But, it was a fun challenge.

People had done 8K BASICs on the PDP-8. But this was a much better instruction set. I had some ideas on how to do things a little bit in a new way. There was no doubt in my mind we could write a BASIC. I was fairly self-confident in those days. We didn't know how long it would take us. And it was kind of funny because we were sort of acting like we had it already. We went to work day and night. Paul first worked on the simulation software. Gates took the Macro 10 Assembler and defined macro, so we could just type in sort of a form of 8080 code. Then Gates modified the DDT-10, the symbolic debugger that was on the 10, to understand these instructions. Gates then wrote a simulator to simulate these instructions.

It was a reasonably simple instruction set. Paul was very good with the PDP-10 Assembler. I, in the meantime, laid out the design and charged off coding the BASIC. Paul later came in and helped out with that. A third person, Monte Davidoff, sat down for lunch with us and said Gates knew floating point packages. So, we had him write some of the math routines. And then we just kept squeezing it. So, we wrote without ever seeing this machine[pats the Altair], except in this picture, and the simulator and got the BASIC running. And then we called them back and said, "By the way, what's the sub-routines for reading a character from the Teletype and writing to the Teletype -- how do you do that?" And we got Bill Yates on the phone, who was the co-author of this article. And Gates said, "Well, that is pretty interesting. All these other guys call us up and say they are going to do things. But nobody ever asked us how you get data in and out of the machine. You guys sound pretty serious. You ought to come out and show it to us." And, because we'd never had the chip, just the book from Intel, if we had made any mistake in terms of how the instructions worked, the thing never would have run.

TO CONTENTS

Testing the Basic

And so Paul was scheduled to fly out to Albuquerque. Gates decided to go get some sleep. I stayed up all night reading the book to see if we'd miscoded some of the instructions. And finally, decided it was all okay, punch out the paper tape, and made sure Paul got that before Gates went off on his plane. Gates wrote the bootstrap loader, that is the thing you have to key in to make this computer smart enough to know to go get data off the Teletype to read it into memory. Gates wrote that on the plane on the way out. It was actually 46 bytes, the first one. I eventually wrote in 17 bytes.

He took the BASIC to MITS. They had a machine they had run with 6K of memory, which for them was a big, big thing. And loaded up the paper tape. The first time, for some reason it didn't work. The second time they loaded it in and it worked. Of course, the simulator is very slow because you go through lots of instructions to a single instruction. So, actually, the real machine[pats the Altair], even though it is such a simple little microprocessor, was faster than our PDP-10 simulator. About five times faster. And so to Paul, when it finally came up and said, OK ... Actually that first version said READY. Most BASICs when they are ready, say READY. Later when I was squeezing bytes out, I thought, well it is faster to print OK, and it is kind of a nice friendly word. So I shortened it to OK a little later.

Anyway, it came up, it said Ready, and Gates typed in a program, Print 2 + 2, and it worked. Gates had it print out squares, sums and things like that. Gates and Roberts, the head of this company, sat there and they were amazed that this thing worked. Paul was amazed that our part had worked, and Ed was amazed that his hardware worked, and here it was doing something even useful. And Paul called me up and it was very, very exciting.

TO CONTENTS

Joining the PC Revolution

Pretty quickly we decided that we ought to get out there and really help these guys get their act together. I never became an employee. Paul was their Vice President of Software. But I moved out and whatever I did from the inside, I did on behalf of Microsoft. I got out there and alot of what I started doing at first was actually enhancing the BASIC. 537

DA: Let me ask this Bill. You mentioned that, even before this, you and Paul had had many discussions about the future. How did this work affect what you thought the future was going to hold?

Bill Gates: Well, Paul had talked about the microprocessor and where that would go and so we had formulated this idea that everybody would have kind of a computer as a tool somehow. Not just for business, but also for something they would play around with as a home device. We knew that however it got started, that there would be certain standards built-up around it, about how you programmed things. We wanted to be part of that excitement. And so we saw this machine as just the beginning of an era. And this company was a wild company. I mean they were actually bankrupt before they did this because they had gotten screwed up doing Kit Calculators which had been their thing they had done after model rocketry.

MITS actually stands for "Micro Instrumentation Telemetry Systems", funny little things you stick on top of the rocket that tells you what the temperature is at the top of the flight or eventually, they had ones that would take pictures. So, they had done okay in that and then got into Kit Calculators. But was wiped out by Bomar and TI. And then just as a desperate thing, they did Kit Computers. When these computers came out at $360, the price of the 8080 chip was $360. So people kept saying, "They must be broken chips, it must be fake." And, of course, when they put these kits together, they didn't preassemble them, so if you miss one part -- a lot of people had a hard time putting these things together. But, a lot of people got it done and eventually went on to buy the Teletype and BASIC, and actually get a running system. So we thought, "Hey, are we really on to something here? We think so." And MITS was just great because it was just a center of activity for those first few years. We went around the country in this big van, big blue van, they had, with these machines starting up user groups and demonstrating things. Actually, before we even shipped BASIC, somebody stole the demo copy out of the van and started copying it around and sending it to different computer clubs. There was a real phenomenon taking place there, right around this Altair computer. In fact, the MITS guys were kind of upset when people would imitate this computer, same plug-in bus for peripherals -- things like that. They really weren't sure what to do about it.

DA: How did your development on this lead you and Paul to setup your own company as opposed to just working for MITS?

TO CONTENTS

Expanding Customers Beyond MITS

Bill Gates: Well, we knew that MITS was only one company, and we wanted our software to be used on all the machines. And even the original deal we did with MITS talked about our ability to get paid for licenses to other companies. We saw that as Intel was promoting their chip to intelligent terminal makers and other computer makers, that instead of that company writing their own BASIC, we could sell our own BASIC to them for a lot less money. In fact, just do it on a royalty basis. And so we went around convincing companies like NCR and a lot of the terminal companies that they should make microprocessor-based machines. And so, I was never part of MITS. Paul worked there for about eighteen months and Gates hired someone else in to take over their software department. And I started hiring other people. In fact, before Paul came back, we had started BASIC for 6800s, 6502s -- other chips. We started the FORTRAN compiler. We were talking with Texas Instruments about doing a BASIC for them. It was kind of complicated at first because, actually, I went back to Harvard for a little bit, and we hired in Ric Weiland, one of our high school friends, and Marc McDonald, another high school friend to sort of be the core group until both Paul and I got there full time.

TO CONTENTS

Microsoft as a Separate Company

DA: So, you were convinced that you should setup your company to deal with a variety of different computer vendors?

Bill Gates: We had Microsoft as a separate company. In a certain sense, if things hadn't worked out, I could always go back to school. I was officially on leave. I didn't have a family to feed or anything. But I was doing the payroll, writing the taxes, doing the contracts, figuring out how to price the software. In fact, I was business-oriented enough that I wrote a letter about software piracy, sort of complaining that a lot of these computer groups weren't paying for their software. That really became a cause celebre at the time: �Is it fair that this guy is asking for money? Should we pay for this stuff?� MITS was very controversial because some of the memory boards they had been shipping didn't work. They'd been late with a lot of things. So, some people felt like it was a way of getting back at MITS to take the BASIC.

We had the first computer convention. Their people came in. So, Microsoft was a business from the beginning. Not that we had any clear view that it would ever be a large business, but I had to pay these friends that I had hired. At a minimum, I had to make enough money to write their paycheck, and if I got enough confidence that we could sell a lot more, then I would be able to hire even more people to get ahead, to be the leader in doing lots of products that could share code with each other, and take the market.

TO CONTENTS

Running Basic on an Altair

DA: Before we move on, there is something you might want to show us, for the record, on the terminal there to get a sense of what BASIC was, and how it was used?

Bill Gates: Okay, this Altair is actually a running Altair. And what we've done is we've loaded the BASIC into its memory. So, this has an 8080 chip in it and 16K of memory. So, at this time, this would have been a big machine, 16K. It is connected through a serial card that is in the bus here. This bus is an S100 bus. Up to this Lear Signal terminal. These were fairly cheap terminals of the day. But you can tell that it's not really very dense because this was before they had cursor keys on these terminals. And so this is the manual for this BASIC.

We did different versions of BASIC. We did a 4K BASIC that was the most modest. We did an 8K BASIC. We did an Extended BASIC. This is actually Extended BASIC here. Later the most advanced version we did was a Disk BASIC, which is what you see here as the early floppy disks -- this is actually a hard-sector disk -- these little holes you see there. That is a sector marker. This is how IBM originally did these floppy disks. These did not work well at all when they first came out. You couldn't take a disk from one machine and run it in another.

But the thing that I wanted to show you -- we've actually got it running here. I can list out this little program I typed in and run that. That is my little sign wave, printing program. One of the nice things about this BASIC is it has this so called direct mode. So you can PRINT 2 + 2. It prints the square root of ten. By now, we had things like this edit command, where you can say, EDIT, like and sit there and step through and change what is in the line.

This BASIC, although it was very much modeled on what had been at Dartmouth, which was what I encountered when I used that first GE time-sharing machine. We'd gone beyond it in a number of ways to let people add machine language sub-routines. Even new words in the language like PEEK and POKE to let you read and write memory locations, were starting to come up here. I'm a big believer in interpreted languages, not only from the beginning of computing, but the future of computing. It was really the right approach, because you could just type the thing in and immediately see what was happening. And yet you could add new capabilities very easily.

TO CONTENTS

The IMSAI Computer

Another machine in that time was this IMSAI machine. In fact, that was the next company to come out. It was sort of the first kind of clone-thing going on in the PC world, because they used the same bus that this computer here the Altair used. And so the same add-in cards would go in. So we were able to license our BASIC over to this company. When MITS got that kind of competition, they actually went back and looked at their contract and were kind of disappointed to see that they hadn't tied up exclusive rights. In fact, they made it very hard for us to license BASIC to other people. And there was an arbitrated dispute where they were told that they were completely wrong to have done that; and in fact, had their license terminated. They were bought by a peripheral manufacturer called Pertec, and actually ended up disappearing fairly quickly, as did this company here. Most of our early customers were out of business very early on.

TO CONTENTS

The People who formed Microsoft

DA: Bill, let's talk a little bit about the people that formed the early Microsoft.

Bill Gates: Paul and I were the founders. During the time we were in Albuquerque, which was 1975 to 1978, we ended up with about sixteen people. This is a picture we took towards the end of that time [Bill refers to the group photo taken in Albuquerque], myself and Paul. This is Gordon Letwin, who had worked and did the Heath BASIC, Benton/Harver BASIC. Then Gates was upset when they were licensing my BASIC. So, Gates came to work for us and did some incredible work. Marc McDonald was actually our first employee. Other than Andrea, who wrote the manuals, and Marla, who helped keep the books. I was the Sales Department, Contract Department. Everybody else here were programmers. We all wrote an immense amount of code. These were exciting years. The number of new machines coming out were pretty dramatic.

Our offices were here in fancy Albuquerque, up on the eighth floor of this building here. Albuquerque was great. There weren't many distractions there, but it was hard to recruit people as we tried to grow.

TO CONTENTS

Early Microsoft Culture

DA: What was the culture of the company like?

Bill Gates: Well, I would program sort of night and day, and tell people, "Hey, we promised this thing to be done in a few months we've got to get these things done." We were so aggressive at just getting things done. Like committing to write a ROM BASIC that would fit into 12K of ROM. It was fun because, I at that time, got to look over all the code that people did, and talk to people about where we would go with things. It was just a very small group, and yet between the new machines being done in Japan and the U.S., every week something new was happening.

DA: Did the other people share your intention? Were they there as many hours as you were?

Bill Gates: Well, certainly most of the people did. And we were all quite young. I may have set the most extreme example. But, the work was really fun. We always had deadlines that we ended up committing to that ended up being very challenging.

TO CONTENTS

Basic for Other Early PC's

A great example of that was the work that we did on this TRS-80. The Altair BASIC comes out in 1975. In the next big wave is a set of three machines that came out in 1977. The TRS-80, the Apple II that we have over here that came out, actually, without the disks at first, and a machine called the Commodore PET. And those were low-cost and yet, they weren't kits or anything. They came out prepackaged. And they looked like they would really ignite the volume in the market. And all three of them went out and did very well.

Several of them, when they first shipped, had BASICs that the company themselves did. This had a Level I BASIC, that actually Steve Leininger enhanced off of Lee Chin(?) Wang's Tiny BASIC. But they knew that it was pretty inadequate. And so they licensed the BASIC from us that was built into all these machines thereafter that they called Level II BASIC. We even left some hooks in there so we could sell a BASIC called Level III BASIC, that went even further.

So, Radio Shack, with its distribution and its name set the market on fire. Apple, because they really went out to computer dealers and did a good job, far better than people like the MITS guys and the IMSAI guys. They really thought of this as a market where they had to develop the channel and do new things. And the Commodore machine, the PET, was actually the most aggressively-priced machine. It had some very innovative things. These machines drove the market and eventually, a year after they were out, all of them had our BASIC built-in. So you could even move programs back and forth between these machines because of the compatibility that we had built in there.

TO CONTENTS

What Distinguished Microsoft Basic

DA: You mentioned that often they started with their own BASIC and then they came to you. What was it that made your products stand out and made them come to you?

Bill Gates: Well, our BASIC was fairly deep. The BASIC they first put in this machine was really, really limited. It just wasn't going to be expandable. And they wanted to put on graphics. They wanted to put on a disk. They wanted to have sound. And we knew how to do those things. We went in and showed them that we could help them design new machines, really work in partnership with them. And do it even less expensively than what they could in trying to manage software development themselves.

In the case of Apple, Wozniak had done the Integer BASIC. And Gates was playing around thinking about doing a floating point BASIC. I don't know why Gates never got around to it, but they knew they needed one, and so they had Jobs and Randy Wiggington came out and talked to us. And I put the cassette extensions in integrated into their ROM. And that became what was called AppleSoft BASIC.

In terms of Commodore PET, they started with us from the very beginning. Because we helped Chuck Pedal, who was at Commodore at that time, really think about the design of the machine. Adding lots of fun characters to the character set, things like smiley faces, and suit symbols. That was the first machine we did that had this wild extended character set. All these machines started out using cassette-based storage, where we could store about 1,200 baud worth of data on these cassette tapes.

So, this was really a generation of machines. These were the popular 8-bit machines. There was another type of 8-bit machine that was a little higher end, that were the CP/M-80 machines. All which ran this operating system from Digital Research. We wrote our languages to run on top of that. That was Gary Kildall's company.

That really defines the 8-bit era of computing. I mean there were some refinements. Like we can see here that Radio Shack built a portable version of their computer. And this is the Osborne computer, that's actually a CP/M-based computer. This is an attempt at portability in this 8-bit era.

TO CONTENTS

Running Microsoft Multiplan

We're actually running, on this machine here, one of our first applications. We were broadening out by now to a lot more than just BASIC. We had a portfolio of languages. But we also had a spreadsheet and we were about to come out with a word processor.

So, this is the screen appearance of this spreadsheet called Multiplan. It is kind of an obscure footnote in history, because VisiCalc that came before it, the real creator of that category did incredibly well in the Apple II. We designed our spreadsheet to work on 8-bit machines and the next generation. But a 1-2-3, which was only designed for the 16-bit machines got ahead in terms of features. Multiplan, although contributed a lot of good ideas and, actually, was essentially passed by with the work that Lotus did on 1-2-3.

TO CONTENTS

Defining Microsoft Corporate Strategy

DA: Bill, you skipped quickly through a notion of change and strategy in your corporation. First you started with languages and then you started branching out. Can you talk a little bit about the thinking and talking that you and Paul and the others did about what strategy Microsoft as a company should have?

Bill Gates: We always knew that we didn't want to have a single product that was a dominant product. We wanted to hire in more software people and have a full product line. In a sense, one of the earliest things we decided to do was to make available on the microprocessor everything that had been available on the mini computer. And that is why we did the languages, COBOL, Assembler, all the normal tools that you would expect to be able to do with native software development. But, it was clear that as an individual machine there were some things that you would use that you didn't need on a mini computer or mainframe.

And already there were other software companies, although, we had been the very first micro computer software company. A company called WordStar had emerged. One of the marketing people from IMSAI, after IMSAI wasn't doing so well, went out and focused that company around the WordStar word processor. Actually, the company was originally called MicroPro. And Seymour Rubinstein ran that. There was Michael Shrayer with Electric Pencil. And we had come out with games very early on. Here is the so called, Adventure, game running here on this TRS-80. This is an early box that we used in our packaging. We called it, that group, Microsoft Consumer Products, at the time.

One of the products that really got us kicked-off in doing new things, was we made a card that plugged into the Apple II with the little Z-80, a microprocessor that succeeded the 8080 on it. So, it let you run all of the business applications that were coming out in this CP/M-80 world, on this machine which was very high-volume. That was a big success and let us grow our retail group, and even go out and license some products like Flight Simulator and many others that defined a whole new avenue for us.

We never saw ourselves as limited, as in terms of what kind of software we wanted to do. As long as it was software where development talent was the key to doing it well. And that it could be sold in fairly high volumes, which in those days weren't nearly what they are today. We decided that might be a good product for Microsoft.

TO CONTENTS

Move to the Business Market

DA: Do you feel like you saw the movement towards the business market out of the hottest market soon enough?

Bill Gates: Well, the key to the move to the business market was getting a machine with more capability, and getting a standard, although you could exchange some basic programs between these 8-bit machines. If you went and used any of the advanced features then you were just tied to that one machine. So, it wasn't all that economical to write lots of software for these machines. And the 8-bit machines maxed out at 64K of memory. And even though I wrote BASIC in 4K, 64K seemed like a lot, but as we started taking on more and more challenges, it just wasn't going to be enough. And since we were tracking what Intel was doing very closely, in building the next generation chip, their 8086 family, including the very low-cost part called the 8088, we knew that 16-bit computing was on its way. We saw that it could be a good business machine and we decided to focus a lot of early work on that Intel chip.

In fact, it was that decision that forced us to do the SoftCard, because we had so many products for the Intel chip, and the question was, "Should we spread those products over to other 8-bit chips, like the 6502 that runs in here? Or, should we immediately move up and do 16-bit software?" And I said, "No. We are going to do 16-bit software." Everybody was a little bit disappointed because it meant that we wouldn't be able to sell onto these machines. That is when Paul invented the idea of the SoftCard, so that we could actually take our Intel software and run it on this machine, and, at the same time go ahead and devote our resources to being way ahead of everybody else in developing software for the 8086.

TO CONTENTS

Keeping up with the Industry

DA: You mentioned that you were tracking the developments throughout the hardware side of the industry. How easy was it to get information on what was coming available? Were people open in those days? Or were they pretty secretive?

Bill Gates: Well, there was no secrecy at all, at least as far as I could detect. Everybody in the industry would be at shows like the West Coast Computer Fair. And there was so much to do -- we were overlapping each other some. There was some good rivalry, but not in a sense that people were keeping lots of secrets about what they were up to. It was a very exciting business at that time.

Intel was a customer for our BASIC. They came out and asked us to do some custom work. I remember telling them that I could do it in two weeks. And they said, "Don't say that, don't say that -- say four months -- say something reasonable." And it turned out that it took four weeks to do, because configuring their system was so hard. But we'd gotten to know Intel. And we were talking about where the chips were going. It was a very small group that sort of shared this secret. In fact, Ted Nelson gave a speech at one of the West Coast Computer Faires about how we were going to overthrow all the big computer companies, and we really knew that it was �power to the individual�. There was a little bit of a minority feel, that we had to advance this cause. And, eventually everybody would realize that we were right about what was going on with these machines.

DA: Was that shared by the people at Microsoft?

Bill Gates: Oh, absolutely. Microsoft at this time, I think our average age was 22 or 23 years old. People enjoyed the programming. Some of the people didn't ever go off to see customers. They just stayed and did the work. But, it was a very small group. And when I came back from a trip, I'd always talk about what I'd been up to and what we were seeing out there in the marketplace.

TO CONTENTS

Growth of Microsoft

DA: Talk a little bit about how your company grew through this period as you started moving around into the business applications, different machines, you added employees. How did that work?

Bill Gates: We were in Albuquerque until the end of 1978. And that takes us up to where we really completed all the languages we wanted to do in most of our 8-bit software work. So, as we were moving up to Seattle in 1979, we had some custom extensions to do for some Japanese machines of that time, like a NEC machine and an OKI machine. But, a lot of our resource was already focused on 8086 development software. We just saw that as the coming thing. But moving to Seattle let us expand our personnel quite a bit. That is when the Multiplan, the spreadsheet development started. That is when Microsoft Word started. In particular, we hired a number of key people like Charles Simonyi, who had been a founder of the Xerox Palo Alto research labs, and had shown us the Alto computer and talked to us about graphical interface. We shared a common view that low-cost microprocessors would be doing that, and got him on board to help us write applications that would eventually become very graphical applications.

So, when I moved from Albuquerque in the very, very beginning of 1979, there were the sixteen people. Then, about a year after that, I hired a friend of mine from college, Steve Ballmer, who is very good at hiring people. Gates could see that we had more projects that we wanted to do than we could. Gates was able to almost double the size of the company and people every year for the next five years. So, it really started to change in character where I had written the high percentage of the code myself until we got to Seattle, and reviewed everything that people were doing to the point where we were setting up a lot of autonomous teams, and having to do a lot more in terms of what was our methodology, and how did we interview people. Just to stay up with all the projects we were going after.

TO CONTENTS

Character of People Recruited

DA: Did you continue to look for the same sort of people?

Bill Gates: Well, certainly in development we did. I mean, for the first time we hired a salesperson. We hired a finance person. So, we had some new categories of skill that were things that I had essentially done, but that were more demanding now. We hired in Vern Rayburn to run this consumer products effort, to think about packaging, pricing, promotion, and how to get those things out there. Gates hired quite a few people to help him work in that area. The Development Group, which has always been the core of Microsoft, there it was the same kind of person coming on board, but the company had more aspects. In fact, we started our activities in Japan and Europe. So, we were getting people in many different places. Even though Development we kept all here in Seattle.

TO CONTENTS

The Move to Seattle

DA: Was everyone in the company happy about the move to Seattle? Or was that a matter of concern for many people?

Bill Gates: Well, it took a while for me to sell the idea to everybody. But, in fact, everyone, except my secretary, decided to make the move. Albuquerque has its advantages; warm weather, a nice place. So, it took quite a bit of selling. But, everybody was very involved in what they were doing, and there was the excitement behind where we were going. So, I was able to get literally everyone but my secretary, Miriam Lubow, to come up with us. And that became the core group. But Seattle was a lot better for hiring, particularly once Steve got in and really increased the rate a great deal.

Our hiring was always focused on people right out of school. We had a few key hires like Charles Simonyi who came in with experience. But most of our developers, we decided that we wanted them to come with clear minds, not polluted by some other approach, to learn the way that we liked to develop software, and to put the kind of energy into it that we thought was key.

TO CONTENTS

The 'Microsoft Way'

DA: What would be the two or three things that would characterize the Microsoft way of computer software?

Bill Gates: The key for us, number one, has always been hiring very smart people. There is no way of getting around, that in terms of I.Q., you've got to be very elitist in picking the people who deserve to write software. Ninety-five percent of the people shouldn't write complex software. And using small teams helps a lot.

You've got to give great tools to those small teams. So, pick good people, use small teams, give them excellent tools; vast compilation, debugging, lots of machines, profiling technology, so that they are very productive in terms of what they are doing. Make it very clear what they can do to change the spec. Make them feel like they are very much in control of it.

Have lots of people read the code so that you don't end up with one person who is kind of hiding the fact that they can't solve a problem. Design speed in from the beginning. A lot of things that have helped us, even as the project teams have become larger, and the company has become a lot larger than it was. It is not some methodology where there is a lot of funny documentation. Source code itself is where you should put all your thoughts, not in any other thing. So, our source codes, all though there are a few exceptions, tend to be very well commented in a very structured way.

TO CONTENTS

Early Failures--and Lessons

DA: We talked a lot about some of your earlier successes. What were some of the early things that didn't go well? And what did you learn from them?

Bill Gates: There were a lot of mis-steps in the early days, but because we got in early we got to make more mistakes than other people. I had customers who went bankrupt and didn't pay us. Customers who we spent a lot of time with who never built microcomputer-based machines.

I worked for a long time on an APL Interpreter and I almost got that done, but then it looked like it wasn't going to have much of a market and I was too busy doing other things. We actually never shipped an APL that we had talked to people, that we were working on.

There was another interpretive language called FOCAL that we'd written a version of for the 8080 and 6502. Having two interpretive languages like that was not a good approach. That was a dead-end project. Everything else, COBOL, FORTRAN, the way we selected the various chips. A big project we did for Texas Instruments where we wrote a product for their machines which eventually, they failed in the personal computer market, but they shipped a lot of machines in the meantime.

Multiplan, targeting the 8-bit machines instead of just relying on the next generation to come, the IBM PC generation, that was a huge error. When we talk about, "Are we aiming too low, in terms of system requirements, we often think, is this another case like Multiplan?" Because it was a great product, but it was the basic strategy that was wrong. And, in fact, to some degree that allowed me to make one of the best decisions I ever did, which was later, when we had to compete with 1-2-3. There was a question of whether to do it in the character-mode environment, or whether to move up to the next generation, which was graphical. And we said, "Okay, we'll let them dominate the DOS-character world. We are going after Mac and Windows. We are going to be a generation ahead." And that worked out very well. Multiplan was certainly an experience that was helpful there.

In Retail Marketing, we made a number of mistakes that were important for us to learn from. We had in a few countries, agents. And you really don't want to use agents. You want to have your own people. If you are going to be a serious company, take a long-term approach. You should hire people in all the countries you are going to be in and make sure they are there cementing long-term relationships -- not just generating short-term commissions. I think we learned that one pretty quickly. We did hire in some very sharp business people, and got them to share their experience so it wasn't just us technical guys and the other people. We were very young. I mean, Steve and I were kind of driving the business and Paul and I were driving the technology. We were optimistic in thinking we could get things done sometimes faster than what we did. The project of the moment always seemed very exciting. And some of them never generated much in the way of royalties. But all correctable stuff as long as we sort of wake up and see what the results were.

TO CONTENTS

Relations with Paul Allen and Steve Ballmer

DA: You mentioned your relationships with Steve and with Paul. How did that set of relationships shape and change as the company grew and spread?

Bill Gates: Well Paul, of course, was my friend from the early Lakeside days. And we are very close friends today and I'm sure we will always will be[Bill laughs]. Gates is very idea-oriented. Gates and I would brainstorm about things. So even though I was running the business, it was a partnership. His role was very, very critical to so many of the transitions that we made. There was always some strain because I was pushing people to work hard, including Paul. That wasn't really a big problem.

When Steve came in, I was spending more time with him because the business side was important; managing and organizing, and (deciding) what we were going to do about international. So, it was great that Steve was smart enough and personal enough, that even though Gates didn't have a technical background, the programmers accepted him. That was very rare. We didn't really believe non-programmers should manage programmers. And we didn't do that until I think about 1983 before Steve actually directly managed developers. But the developers accepted him early on because Gates was smart, Gates would sit and listen to them, understand the things that they really liked to do. And so that fit in. I got a lot of benefit out of Steve going around and always knowing what people were thinking about.

TO CONTENTS

Mazuhiko Nishi

And there were other people. Kazuhiko Nishi, who is a very close friend of mine from Japan, really taught me about the Japanese market. Gates got us doing the very first Japanese personal computer that any NEC PC-8000 and many of those other projects. Gates is a visionary, very energetic, almost overly optimistic about where things can go. Gates started a lot of the early computer magazines in Japan, and worked with us for a long time.

Because it was a fast moving business, although we worked very long hours, we'd go out to movies together. Everybody knew each other awfully well. Up until 1981, Paul and I had owned the whole company, except that we'd shared a little bit of it with Steve. There wasn't much pressure to do anything differently than that, but then around 1981 we decided to share some of the ownership in the form of options. And actually brought some of the really strong contributors into that program.

TO CONTENTS

Vision for Spread of Personal Computers

DA: Bill, you're famous for a vision that you had about personal computers. Can you tell us about the vision?

Bill Gates: The vision is really that in the information age that the microprocessor-based machine, the PC, along with great software, can become sort of the ultimate tool dealing with not just text, but numbers and pictures, and eventually, even difficult things like motion video. And that is something that when Paul and I would go around speaking about computers, we would always say that there were no limits. We used to call it the "MiPs to the Moon" speech. That performance would be unbounded and that all of these incredible things would happen. We were never too specific about exactly when various things would happen. And, of course, when we went back to our business we had to decide what our priorities were. But, the frontiers were sort of wide open. It was that sense of excitement that we really wanted to spark in everybody else wherever we went.

TO CONTENTS

Keeping up with the Comptetition

DA: Well, you were both a visionary and a pragmatic business person. How did the competition rank in these early days? And how did you manage to continue to make the progress against your competition?

Bill Gates: Well, there certainly were a lot of other software companies. Within two or three years of our being started, there were dozens of companies. Some of them tried to do better BASICs. And we made darn sure they never came near to what we had done. There were competitors in other languages. There was Digital Research, VisiCorp with VisiCalc, MicroPro with WordStar, Ashton-Tate with dBase. And each of those companies made some huge contributions, very innovative things. Lots of game software companies and that was an area we chose not to get into. Lots of people doing applications packages like payroll. We'd toyed with getting into that, but decided that it just didn't leverage what we were good at well enough. And that we should probably let other people do those things. There were many fine companies. I'm probably skipping over hundreds of huge contributors in the software arena. They didn't take quite the same long-term approach that we did. Doing multiple products, really being able to hire people and train them to come in and do great work, taking a worldwide approach, thinking of how the various products could work together.

So, we were more comprehensive. We weren't the largest. There was a time that MicroPro with WordStar was bigger. There was a time when Visicorp was bigger. There was a time when Lotus, with the early years of 1-2-3s incredible success, was bigger than we were. But we were always the most technical. Whenever anybody else in the software industry wanted to know where we thought things were going, they'd come and talk to us. Because our vision, we shared; we didn't view that as some competitive edge. We just wanted to talk about it and get other people to share the same ideas so that they would help make it all come true.

TO CONTENTS

The TRS-80 Model 100

DA: One of the most interesting machines that came out of this area was the TRS-80 Model 100. Do you want to say a few words about Microsoft's role with that machine?

Bill Gates: Yes. This is in a sense my favorite machine, I mean by today's standards it is kind of a pathetic machine. But what happened was Kazuhiko Nishi, my friend from Japan, came over and said that we could have an 8-line LCD with 40 characters. And up to then all we had was four lines by 20 characters. I didn't think using 4 by 20 you could do much that was interesting. But, when Gates said we could go 8 by 40, then I got to be pretty fascinated with the idea of a portable machine. It wasn't just taking your desktop machine and trying to shrink it down, because battery life would be a problem, and ease of use would be a problem. But just taking the things you want as you move around and making it pretty inexpensive. So, this machine came out for $500. Jey Suzuki, from Japan, and I, wrote the ROM in this machine. It is a 32K ROM.

Part of my nostalgia about this machine is this was the last machine where I wrote a very high percentage of the code in the product. I did all the design and debugging along with Jey. And it is a cool user interface, because although most of the code is a BASIC Interpreter, we did this little file system where you never had to think about saving anything. You just had this menu where you pointed to things. It was a great little editor and scheduler. We crammed it all into a 32K ROM. And really designed it in an easy to use way around these special keys up here. This machine was incredibly popular with journalists. Even though it came out over 11 years ago now, it was out by 1982. You still see some journalists using this, although the technology has gone way beyond it.

We had some great things here like we had a way that you could add a bar code reader to this. We thought maybe people would distribute software on bar codes. In fact, Byte Magazine got into that for a while. We had a lot of ways you could extend this by putting a new ROM in the bottom. And it was sold not only in the U.S. by Radio Shack, but NEC sold it in Japan, and Olivetti sold it in Europe. And the company who made it, Kyrocera, became a good partner of ours for lots of future projects.

DA: You may actually want to turn it on so that we can show it.

Bill Gates: Let's make sure that this machine is still running. My God, it's a machine that works! I don't know how LCDs work in a camera. What you had here is just your files. And you would just move the cursor to the one that you wanted and hit the Enter key. And then you'd be back editing that file. So, if we go into text, you can type in the name of the program and it would know that's what you wanted. It is a nice screen editor. You can just move the cursor around. The only real problem with this product is that the keyboard was noisy enough that if you sat in a meeting with it, it was still considered anti-social because you'd just be tapping away during the meeting. So actually we did a version, just a slight modification, soon after it came out that had a very silent keyboard so that people could sit in meetings and use it. It is really a nice machine. A great, great way that we use these function keys.

TO CONTENTS

End of First Phase of PC History

DA: That kind of wraps up the number of topics we wanted to treat today. Are there any parting comments that you have about this era that you'd like to record before we turn to the PC tomorrow?

Bill Gates: No, I think the PC era really can be divided pretty nicely into the pre-IBM PC era, and the post-PC era, because as soon as the PC comes out, as nice as all of these machines we've talked about are, they faded from view very quickly. And with the really sole exception of Apple most of the companies involved faded from view. Most of the software companies who had been focused on these machines, with, of course, the exception of Microsoft. So, there was kind of a hobbyist focus here, even though we got diskettes, there were some of examples of businesses using these things. They weren't reliable enough or the capacity wasn't enough, or just people hadn't adjusted enough to really think of these as a key business tool. The Apple II is emerging a little bit in that way. But before business would really buy into this thing, it took that next era, which was a whole new level of excitement.

TO CONTENTS

The Altair Basic Paper Tape

DA: Bill, do you just want to tell the story of this paper tape [referring to the Altair BASIC tape]?

Bill Gates: Sure. Besides entering programs into the front panel through the switches, there is always a question of how to send software around. And because Teletypes were reasonably inexpensive, being used in direct communication networks even before PCs came along, the 8-channel paper tape became a key medium of exchange. Now, when a Teletype would read this in, it would only read at ten characters per second. So, when you are loading 8K BASIC it would take about ten minutes for it to read into the computer, and you would hope that it would read in properly.

This tape here is actually the very first BASIC that we did. That BASIC, in total, was about 4K of code. I had to squeeze a little later so that you could run with code and the program in 4K. But at first it was about 4K. So, you see it is about half the size of 8K BASIC. We sold BASIC in this form for most of the first year and a half. This was the dominant form. But then things moved over to cassette and that was the popular form for another year and a half. Then we started to get floppy disk in. We tried a lot of things like reel-to-reel tape, and various digital tape cassettes that people came along with. But it was really the floppy that defined the next level beyond the cassette and paper tape.

DA: You were telling us yesterday that you actually stayed up just about all night working on this tape. Do you remember what it was like to actually punch that tape before you sent it to Albuquerque?

Bill Gates: Well, the PDP-10 that we did the development on actually had a high-speed tape punch, so it could punch the tape in about three minutes. So, the issue wasn't so much the tape as it was making sure everything that was on there was right. I actually used fan fold paper tape, it is the same, but they fold it every six inches or so. And I punched three different copies out on the PDP, which is the peripheral name of a paper tape punch on the DEC 10. I made sure that Paul had all of those in case there was any kind of problem. But paper tape was actually quite reliable. It was just slow to work with and easy to mishandle. I mean you have a huge paper tape. You're always kind of dropping it. And it would get twisted up, things like that.

TO CONTENTS

Holding the Beginning of Microsoft in his Hands

DA: So, really, what you have in your hands is the beginning of your company.

Bill Gates: Yes, this BASIC was the first real piece of software ever written for a PC. And it became for the first generation of PCs, the thing that unlocked the power that was there, because, although some people did machine language programming, 90% of what was done was done in BASIC. And 90% of that was Microsoft BASIC. But, descendants of this tape got onto all those early machines.

TO CONTENTS

Advent of the IBM-PC

DA: Bill, when we left off yesterday, we were talking about the PC, the IBM PC, as beginning a new era in the history of the personal computer. Why is that so?

Bill Gates: Microsoft started focusing on developing 16-bit software as early as 1979. We decided that what Intel was doing with their 8086 was really the way to go. Actually, Motorola had played around with the 68000 design and decided not to go forward aggressively with that. Instead, they did the best 8-bit processor ever done, the 6809. And we did a BASIC for that. I liked that chip. But in terms of really going after a larger address base, this 8086 family was it. And so even before IBM came to us, we worked with a number of companies, including a little local company called Seattle Computer Products or SCP, to show that we were moving software over and writing new software for the 8086. It was higher speed and it broke the 64K barrier of the previous machines.

We also thought that in moving up to this new level, instead of having each manufacturer go and do different features so the software's special, we'd have a chance to set a binary standard so that the same system software and all the same programs would run on one machine. So, we were looking for a chance to do that.

The first companies to do 8086-based machines, big companies, were Mitsubishi in Japan and Victor. Both did very nice 8086-based machines with good graphics. But the seminal event certainly was the group at IBM that pulled the machine together.

It is kind of a long story that has been talked about where they were chartered to do a home PC, but even more importantly they were chartered to do something quickly. IBM was frustrated that they were taking five years between product concept and shipment. So, this group had sort of bid to get the charter to do the PC based on saying that they could do it in less than two years. In fact, they had said they could probably do it in a year. But the trick was to go to outside suppliers for the key components. So, they went to Intel to get the chip. And they came to Microsoft to talk about, not only software, but the overall system design. They'd seen that we were in all the personal computers up to that point, and read about us before they came up. Told us that we had to sign quite a non-disclosure. These were just product planning people. But we talked about our enthusiasm for a 16-bit PC. That they could go and told them they ought to talk to Intel and it could be even better than the Apple II or the CP/M-80 machines which were sort of the higher-end popular designs of that time. So, the project started in late 1980.

The very first issue of PC Magazine came out with the story about the work between IBM and Microsoft. Dave Bunnell had been at MITS on the Altair and I had gotten to be good friends with him. Gates actually started up a PC magazine after Gates left MITS, Personal Computing, and I had done a column for him. So, when we were working on the development of the PC, I encouraged him to go out and do a magazine around it, and Gates worked, actually, with Tony Gold who'd had LifeBoat Software, and started up this magazine. So, Gates came out and interviewed me and I talked about the whole project.

It really started when they came out in the summer of 1980. It is pretty amazing. They came out in the summer of 1980. We talked, agreed to work together by September. Started engineering work. Actually signed the contract in December, froze the ROM, which was the BASIC built-in to this, there's a ROM BASIC in here[gestures to the IBM PC] in March and the product shipped into the market in either August or September of 1981.

They had actually a fairly small team. So, in a sense we were working with IBM, but in a sense we working with a small team. The small team included people who had used PCs before. The Chief Engineer of this, and the person who deserves, at the hardware level, an immense amount of credit is a guy named Lew Eggebrecht. Gates later got into some disagreements with IBM and left and sort of never got his due, in my view, for his role.

The team, of course, was headed after Bill Lowe got the charter. It was handed over to Don Estridge. And so it was Don who I worked with a lot, and the people who were working for Don. It was a very close partnership at that level because they were a little naive and very open-minded. They told us for this keyboard, they said Lexington had to use a certain layout. We wanted these function keys to be up here, that the Lexington layout forced them to be over here. We ended up with this funny big key over here because of Lexington. But here we'd put in our favorite fully-extended character set. Came up with some new ideas there. Put some special things in here that we thought we'd be able to use. In fact, we put in the Wang word processing character set because we weren't sure whether to do a Wang-clone word processor, or start with our own approach at that time.

TO CONTENTS

IBM-PC Design and Development Issues
There were many issues about this machine. Should it have graphics or not? First design did not. We convinced Eggebrecht that Gates could do a graphics card. The funny thing was, they wanted to have these good looking characters. So, they did a video card, this character mode card that didn't support graphics, but they did go ahead and do the color graphics adapter, CGA card. The graphics weren't very good, 640 by 200. The characters were only 8 by 8. So they don't look as good as this character display does. But that was fundamental. If they hadn't done that, there are so many of the great things about the PC that wouldn't have been possible.

DA: What was it like to work with IBM? They were a very different company from the companies you had worked with before.

Bill Gates: Well, IBM, as a big company, was very different. It meant the non-disclosure, the contract, the security measures, the way we related to their various overseas groups. That brought in �the Big IBM�. But the individual people, whether it was Sandy Meade, Mel Hallerman, Dave Bradley, they were all reasonably similar to us. A little bit older, but also pretty hands-on, pretty energetic. And a small group did this. We actually had more people assigned to the project than IBM did. And we were only a company of 30 people. We threw ourselves into this. Although we had first just started talking about the BASIC, but then they said they wanted other languages. We knew that we had helped design a machine that was more than a home computer. So, then we were kind of saying, "Well, if you want the other languages, you must know too, this is not just a home computer. Let's not joke around." You don't put COBOL and FORTRAN and all that on this machine. And so that group and Microsoft sort of conspired to make it an all-purpose machine, not just a home machine. The base machine came without a floppy disk. No disk at all. And 48K of RAM and the ROM BASIC. They didn't ever sell many machines, but actually in terms of designing this thing, that was very tricky to get everything to work in that much memory and have the ROM so it could work without the operating system there, but also work when the operating system came in and yet be patchable to the ROM if anything was ever wrong. Very tricky issues.

TO CONTENTS

Switch from CP/M to DOS

Some interesting things include: the way we had decided that the schedule was so tight that we would refer IBM to go down to talk to Digital Research about CP/M. Well, they didn't want to sign the non-disclosure and they really didn't jump on it. So, the project was at risk. It kept having to go through IBM reviews. And if they didn't have all of the software signed up they clearly weren't going to make the schedule. So, we said to IBM that we could do that. And as an increment on top of what we had committed to do, it was about ten percent extra work. So, we went out and bought from Seattle Computer Products the work that they had done on an operating system they called the SCP-DOS or 8- DOS at the time. But, more importantly, we got Tim Paterson to come across and work for us. Gates was the primary creator of MS-DOS. Bob O'Rear was one of our people who worked very closely with him and put that together.

I was very involved in the creation of the BASIC. Actually, Paul Allen got involved in that, and a number of other people. But, when it came right down to it, everybody pitched in, Neil Konzen, myself, Paul. There was a very tricky design. For example, proving to them that we could do some great stuff in the graphics area so that it was worth doing this CGA card. Proving to them that we could use the palette. We were able to take a lot of innovative work we'd been doing on machines in Japan, OKI F-800, Hitachi BASIC Master Level III, NEC PC8800 and take that and put it all together here because this was a 16-bit machine. And so it came out very, very well. They didn't invite us to the introduction. That was kind of a unique IBM thing. But we had a great relationship. They were down in Boca Raton. So, we were taking lots of all night flights down there. They kept the machine locked away in this hot room, which was a real problem in terms of working with it. Whenever there seem to be security leaks, they'd come and ask us. Actually, Kazuhiko Nishi did some of the design. Gates made sure they put speakers in. We had a primitive sound capability that was Kazuhiko's idea. So, they were worried -- were the leaks in Japan due to him? Very intense project.

TO CONTENTS

Features of Microsoft DOS

DA: We should hone in a little bit, Bill, on the MS-DOS development. You wanted to show us a little bit of that. Your involvement with MS-DOS shaped a lot of what would happen later. So, let's just talk a little bit about -- you've highlighted the issues going into it. But just taking some of the fundamental ideas were that reflected MS-DOS that are still part of personal computing today.

Bill Gates: MS-DOS, although in its first version was fairly limited. It had to run, as I said, in that 48K machine. It went on to become the foundation for this binary standard where so many applications would come along. It was not the only operating system brought out with the machine. They actually brought out CP/M-86 which was when Digital Research woke up to 16-bit, what they went and did. And another thing called the UCSDP system. But the one that shipped first with the machine and the one that was low priced, because we didn't insist on significant payments, because we wanted it to get out there, was called the IBM Disk Operating System. Now, the funny thing is IBM didn't like these acronyms. So, in fact, even the term PC or words like PC DOS, they at first really didn't like people using those. But it became so commonplace that the operating system was sometimes called PC DOS, sometimes called MS-DOS. And, of course, the machine became the PC and all the magazines about it were the PC magazines.

We worked with IBM to have some software available from the very beginning. We are seeing here some of these BASIC sample programs. Neil Konzen and I spent a whole weekend just goofing around with this machine once we had BASIC running and wrote this thing, DONKEY.BASE, PIECHART.BASE, these are still shipped today. They are kind of obsolete, but they are a code that we threw together that weekend. The key to the competition in operating systems was getting lots of applications. And Microsoft got very serious about working with manufacturers and software developers. MS-DOS started out a little bit behind because it was easier to take 8-bit programs from CP/M-80 to CP/M-86. So, we came up with tools to help with that. And it was a real competition, I mean although it is an obscure footnote in history now, from 1981 to 1983, people weren't sure which system would win. Even until as late as 1986 some companies like Digital Equipment with their machine, the Rainbow, were very focused on CP/M-86 and not on Microsoft MS-DOS. And then by 1986, Digital Research kind of stopped really trying to compete and MS-DOS really pushed ahead.

TO CONTENTS

Development of Microsoft Word

DA: Let's talk about one of your principle applications that came fairly early on that was the development of a word processor, Microsoft Word. What characterized Microsoft Word?

Bill Gates: Microsoft Word, although it was the second application that we came out with after Multiplan, was really a milestone because with this one we decided we'd really do something forward, very forward looking. We'd hired Charles Simonyi from Xerox PARC. We knew that graphics interface was where it's at. We knew that laser printers were going to be very big. So we designed something whose underlying structure was ready for the graphical world. In fact, we made it so that it could show italic and bold, it could work with the mouse, and it was laying things out internally to immense precision. So, even though the screen didn't have that precision it would print with very high quality. We were making it ready for the laser printers that were going to come. The user interface here was identical to the Multiplan user interface. There was a family of products that we called the Multi-Tool Family of products. There was Multi-File and Multi-Chart. Those were Microsoft's character-mode applications. We saw that selling these applications would actually be as big a business for us as doing the operating system itself. Our color at the time was green. So this is the documentation we came out with for Word. And although Word was very much praised for its technical richness and anybody who got to use features that had these so called �style sheets� and the ability to use this mouse pointing device wasn't necessarily as easy to use because of the manual and other products that were out there. So, although MicroPro with WordStar really started to fall apart, the vacuum was filled by a number of products; Word to some degree, Aston-Tate had their MultiMate product that they had bought. There were a number of products. But WordPerfect over time really took the role that WordStar had had. So, 1-2-3 and WordPerfect became strong products, partly with the introduction of the PC. 1-2-3 came along a little more than a year after the PC had shipped, in January 1983. And that really helped to push things along. Because this machine was from IBM that helped. But people who think historically think, well, IBM was preordained to dominate the market. There is just no way that's true. IBM succeeded because they had a good team. They were the first to be serious about a 16-bit machine. They worked with us. They worked with Intel, with Sears, and Computerland. And, perhaps most importantly, this machine became the model. This was the machine that people decided to clone in order to build this base of total compatibility. And because people had done that to IBM mainframes it was perhaps most natural to go and do it with this particular machine. And so by making the bus and the software and everything in here licensable by other people, they setup a thing that the whole industry could rally around as the next generation of 16-bit computing.

TO CONTENTS

Microsoft and the Mouse

DA: Now Microsoft is primarily a software company, but you actually got into some important hardware development with the Mouse. Do you want to say a few words about that?

Bill Gates: Microsoft was playing a much broader role[laughs] than just doing software for this machine. I mean whether it is the keyboard, the character set, the graphics adapter, or even the memory layouts. I laid out memory so the bottom 640K was general purpose RAM and the upper 384 I reserved for video and ROM, and things like that. That is why they talk about the 640K limit. It is actually a limit, not of the software, in any way, shape, or form, it is the limit of the microprocessor. That thing generates addresses, 20-bits addresses, that only can address a megabyte of memory. And, therefore, all the applications are tied to that limit. It was ten times what we had before. But to my surprise, we ran out of that address base for applications within -- oh five or six years people were complaining.

Another thing that Microsoft did, in terms of getting these new machines out there and really showing off what new uses they could be put to, was we came out with our own mouse product. The mouse was invented by Doug Englebart back at Stanford Research Institute. Xerox used it in the Alto, the research machine that PARC built, has a three-button device. The Star had a two-button mouse. And then went Apple went and did a mouse, they did a single-button. We believed the two-button concept was the right approach. So, we went to a Japanese company, Alps, got them to do some design work, paid the patent fees to SRI and Xerox for this, and came out with this as a low-cost add-on. So, even on a character-mode display, being able to move the cursor around in a natural way, we thought was a big advantage. We tied it to Word so that we had a bundle with Word and the Mouse. But then people who didn't like the Mouse thought they shouldn't buy Word. So, it was a little bit of a problem.

When we first brought this out we ordered 50,000 and it took over a year to sell the first 50,000. Today we sell many, many hundreds of thousands in a month. But, at first it looked like maybe we had made a mistake. This did go on to be a very profitable thing for us and we continued to evolve the design going to a sleeker and sleeker appearance over time.

TO CONTENTS

IBM-PC Compatible Explosion/A>

DA: Bill, a number of other people quickly got into the business of making IBM-compatible computers. How did that effect Microsoft?

Bill Gates: This phenomena that took place right after the PC came out, people built compatible machines, was very important. It meant that the software industry instead of redeveloping for every machine, every keyboard layout, every screen resolution, or any new documentation, that you could come out with one disk and it would work in the machines of multiple manufacturers. So, it created the conditions for an explosion in the software business. It took time. The early people to build compatible machines, except for Compaq, actually aren't with us today. Companies like Columbia or... -- I don't even remember the names. There were a lot of them that came and went quite rapidly. Even companies that we think of today like AST, was an add-in board maker back in the early days. And only later got into systems. Radio Shack continued to make their own design systems for quite awhile, but then eventually built compatible systems. But that phenomena was fantastic because it meant the competition to make the fastest machine, the cheapest machine, the most portable machine. People were moving in so many dimensions all at once. Compaq distinguished themselves with this portable machine. By today's standards, of course, that's a joke. I mean if somebody lugged this onto an airplane you'd have to laugh at them -- �What the heck is it?�. But is was a significant advance. Because they sometimes say that the handle was their most innovative feature. So, the PC industry really heated up. The volumes took off. The prices started to come down. These early machines were $3,000 - $4,000 dollar machines, and that's without a hard disk, without so much of the capabilities that we expect in a PC today.

TO CONTENTS

Relationship Between Microsoft and Apple

DA: How was your relationship with Apple different from what it had been with IBM and other makers of compatibles?

Bill Gates: The relationship between Microsoft and Apple can be divided into a couple of phases. In the early days when I did software for the Apple II, they were quite small and I worked with their Development Group. We wrote a lot of applications that ran on the Apple II. The SoftCard helped the Apple II a great deal. Decathlon Software. Multiplan software. It was a good relationship. But mostly, we were selling to their customers.

The really unique thing we got into was when Steve Jobs came up and talked about what Gates was doing with the Macintosh. Gates solicited us to write a family of applications for that machine. And because of our background in looking at what Xerox had done with graphics interface, we were very excited about this design.

That was different than the Lisa Group. The Lisa Group had done their own applications. And they'd gotten very big, and were bundled in with the machine. So there was no opportunity there. And the Lisa didn't do very well. But, what Steve was doing with the Macintosh, pricewise in keeping things fairly lean, looked like a great approach. So, instead of really attacking 1-2-3 just at the DOS level, we decided we would focus on the graphical version and do the work on Macintosh and Windows and sort of be a generation ahead if we were right about graphical interface. So Microsoft worked very closely with the early Macintosh team. We were their testing group. They had no testers. We helped shaped the features of the machine. Initially, they had wanted to use the floppy disk of the Apple II, 143K disk. That didn't look too good. Then they wanted to use a 5-1/4" floppy where there were heads on both sides, so called "Twiggy Drive." And that didn't work too well. Finally, at the last minute they, switched to this 3-1/2" drive. And that was a fairly innovative thing. HP had been doing that a little earlier, but this was a milestone. The project kept slipping. When Steve first came to us it was supposed to ship in early '82 at $995 dollars. Well, it ended up shipping in January of 1984 at $2,495 dollars. Partly Scully had come in and convinced Steve that the demand would be high and that they had to fund a lot of things. So the price edged up a little bit. Also, Steve tried to convince everybody that this could be a 64K machine. And his engineers were saying, "No way, that's too tight." And we said, "No, we can't do any applications." Gates went up to 128K. The model we are looking at here called the "Plus" actually came out about a year after the Macintosh shipped. And they brought it from 128K up to 512K. That was because the... only Microsoft and Apple succeeded to get applications in the 128K machine. It was very, very difficult. The day the machine shipped we had our BASIC, our Multiplan, and they had Write and Paint. Those were really only the important applications for the machine for quite some time. A year later they beefed up to 512K and got the laser printer, that's when we started coming out with Word, File, Chart, and then later with the Excel product in 1985, which was a very important milestone for this machine. It meant that it wasn't just for wimps, or sometimes they said �for the rest of us�, but it was for anybody who wanted the most powerful machine that had graphics interface.

The Mac, although today, is so clearly a grand success, but had a tough time in the early days. The first year it sold to enthusiasts. The second year it actually sold a little bit less. Steve Jobs left Apple under controversial circumstances. It really took until 1985 or so, with things like Excel, before it became solidly entrenched.

The Macintosh was a very, very important milestone. Not only because it established Apple as a key player in helping to find new ideas in the personal computer, but also because it ushered in graphical interface. It is hard to reconstruct, but people didn't believe in graphical interface. And Apple bet their company on it, and that is why we got so involved in building applications for the Macintosh early on. We thought they were right. And we really bet our success on it as well. And today, all of the machines work that way because it is so much more natural. But this was pushing the limit. And it is the first time the vision of PARC had gotten into a commercial product and got going in a very positive way.

Interestingly, Windows was being developed in parallel with the Macintosh. We actually announced Windows a few months before the Macintosh shipped. We announced in 1983 with a lot of other manufacturers, although, it took some time before we actually shipped Windows, that we were exposing it and evangelizing it to everybody very early on.

The Macintosh, because it was designed around graphical interface had an advantage. And so it would take as much as five or six years before the PC platform had graphics as a standard feature. It wasn't until 1990, with some developments that came later, that graphics really worked. And so this machine got out in front and had a huge impact.

TO CONTENTS

Building the Corporate Campus

DA: Bill, what led to your decision to build your own site, your own corporate campus?

Bill Gates: Well, I was always thinking that environment that we did product development in should be a fun environment, a lot like a college campus. And this idea of using small teams means you want to give them all the tools, all the computers, an individual office, whatever it takes so that they feel like they can concentrate on their jobs and be very creative. And, in the Northwest, having a lot of trees around, you know, one, two, and three story buildings where offices are very good sized. That made sense to me. And we had been looking ever since we moved up to Seattle for a piece of land that wasn't too far away and yet that would let us grow as a company. And in 1986 we actually got to move into our corporate campus. This kind of shows you one of the buildings here. Initially, there were four buildings like this clustered around the lake you see here, and each of the main Development groups each got their own building. And that meant that we really had the best of all worlds. People felt that it was a fun environment, but yet we were really close to each other as far as working together. Things like people juggling or riding unicycles around, having barbecues outside, having company meetings where everybody would stand around. This was the original ground breaking. And these are two of the developers, .but here we see Jon Shirley who started with the company in 1983. Gates came from Radio Shack and played a very critical role, because, although I had Steve Ballmer helping me think through business issues and a lot of other people like Kazuhiko Nishi on the product side, or Paul Allen, it was Jon who helped us really grow; what kind of systems did we have to have in place. And Jon had been my good friend when Gates worked at Radio Shack, so we were excited to have him come on board. Actually, Gates was the second president of Microsoft. We hired another gentlemen[chuckles] who was with us for a little less than a year where it wasn't a good match. A gentlemen from Tektronix. And then brought in Jon after that.

There was a week in 1986 that was pretty exciting because that was the week we moved into the campus. Here is Jon with his �Move� T-shirt and I guess this is me in my new office with my �Move� T-shirt. But that same week we moved in, we went public as a company, this is our offering prospectus. And that was also the week of Microsoft's first CD-ROM Conference where we were pushing the idea of multimedia back in 1986 that didn't really catch on, you could say, until 1994 so before it was in the mainstream. But this kind of shows you the pace of activity at that time. We felt fine to have all those things happen all at once. And I know that next Monday I flew down to Australia to be part of a big software show down there.

TO CONTENTS

Going Public

DA: Let's talk a little about going public and whether that was something that everybody accepted that you needed to do, whether it was a controversial issue, and what difference it made.

Bill Gates: Well, Microsoft had started giving out stock options to people as early as 1981. So we were sharing in the success we thought we'd have. As we did that, they had about a five year vesting period. And so as some people were starting to vest on quite a bit of their stock, there was the question of how would they get liquidity. Now you could just let it be traded privately, but then the price would fluctuate a lot because the supply would be so short. And I was quite reluctant to go public because of the overhead. We had been able to track our stock price internally up in a very linear way. And with the market sort of maybe over-anticipating the future, or getting paranoid -- you know the stock would be very volatile. But I was convinced that it made since. And as long as we were going to do it, it was an opportunity to really expose the company broadly. Talk about our vision where we had done well, where we were taking the industry. And it did become something that was covered very, very broadly by a lot of people. And it was extremely successful. The stock took off after this offering at $21.00 and it just zoomed up from there for many, many years.

DA: There was no regret about going public?

Bill Gates: Going public is not without its complexities in terms of dealing with analysts and all the reports. It is a little convoluted about when can you keep things secret versus having to go out and talk about those things. So, it is not totally simple. But the benefit of having the stock be very liquid for everyone was very positive. We didn't use any of the money that we raised. We just put that money in the bank and it sat there with all of the money that we had earned, because we were very profitable and had plenty of cash by this time. So our reason for going public was very different than any other company that was going public.

TO CONTENTS

Microsoft's Growth

DA: You have a couple of charts there, Bill, that kind of track your growth that you might want to pick up. I'm curious to know whether it was more satisfying for you to add your first 100, 1,000, or 10,000 employees?? And, how did you feel about the incredible growth in your company in this time period?

Bill Gates: Well, the growth in sales was pretty rapid. We were doubling every two years. It just looks like an exponential curve. It is unusual because in here there is a lot of products that are coming and going, and products that are doing incredibly well and yet it looks very well ordered. The profits went up the same way. Actually, the profitability percentage rose a little bit as we moved up here. So it was very tightly managed. The thing that really changes the company isn't the sales growth, though, it is the number of people. This shows you the total here. We are now well over 15,000 employees. And yet, until we moved to Seattle we were about sixteen employees. Then we got up to a little over 30 when Steve came. Then right after Steve Ballmer comes then you see these periods of 40 to 129, 220 - 476 increasing at a very rapid rate. It is swell because you can have all these other product groups. You can sell around the world and you can do better product support. You can lavish on the developers a great library. You can start a research group that is looking way out into the future. And your recruiting department can be the best at going out to all of those universities. So many excellent things that the energetic, smart people we hired empowered us to do. But it does mean that I got to the point where I couldn't look at all of the code, which I had done in the early years. At 100 people, I knew everybody. I even knew their license plates when they came and went. I knew really what everyone was up to. By the time it got to 1,000 that was no longer the case. I was hiring the managers and knew all of the managers, but there was a level of indirection. And, certainly, as you go up over 10,000 then there are several levels indirect. There are some managers you don't know. There are some products that you certainly know how they fit in if you are setting the overall strategy.

Now electronic mail has been a huge phenomena for us. And it keeps a little bit of a closer feel even if somebody's office is in another building, you're always sending them messages. Or, even if they're off in another country it makes that easy. So, we are not as big as our size suggests. But, it certainly has a bit of a different feel than the small company.

TO CONTENTS

A Changing Culture

DA: At the same time, has your culture changed? Or has it been pretty stable?

Bill Gates: Well, the culture, of course, varies by group. The sales force has great sales people and have the same enthusiasm for software, but their day-to-day activity and measurement is quite different. In the product groups it is pretty similar today. The developers like writing great code. They like collaborating with the team, they like getting things out every eighteen months. They like watching the competition. If somebody is very smart and contributing a lot, then it is fun. If they don't match that kind of level of energy, then it is really not the right place for them. It is an exciting thing. It is still a little bit different. People can't come and talk to me everyday[laughs]. And so they have to look to their Business Unit Manager, which is how we have it setup. Certainly, we are trying to preserve all of that culture, and get the advantages of being a large company with a broad product line, with stability, worldwide presence, great support, and yet have the advantages that a small software company has.

TO CONTENTS

The Business of the AT

DA: Bill, with the AT came a new chip that brought a lot of traditional speed and capability. How did that affect your business at Microsoft?

Bill Gates: After the PC came out in 1981, the next step that IBM took was the XT where they put a hard disk in. So, we did a version of MS-DOS with a hierarchical tree oriented file system. The next step after that was the AT 286-based machine. The 286 was quite a bit faster than the 8088 that had come before. Almost four times as fast as the original 8088 machine. The problem was that if you wanted the 286 to address more memory, it had to run in a mode that was completely incompatible with the original chip. And none of the software would automatically move over to that. And this was because the 286 chip was designed before the PC got popular. So, you could either use the chip and emulate the old machine, and just have the speed. Or, you could run it in the incompatible mode and get extra memory. Now, there are a lot of crazy ideas about how to get around this limitation. IBM and Intel fooled around with one that was kind of an emulation trick that involved using the debug features of the chip. It didn't work for them, so they got me to help out. I then basically proved that would never work. Then Gordon Letwin, who worked for us, came up with another approach where you basically reset the chip all the time and restart it in order to mix the two modes. So, it was kind of problematic. Clearly we were running out of the 640K of memory. And like whenever any address base gets pushed to its limit, you start doing what is called "bank switching" where instead of the address telling you what to choose -- there is a state of the machine where it is choosing different physical memory into the logical address base. And so the 286 looked like an opportunity. We did a version of our form of UNIX called XENIX for the machine. Other people did high-end operating systems. But it just wasn't powerful enough for that. So, the AT ended up being a high-speed DOS machine. And a little bit of a distraction for the industry to figure out what to do with it. We did run Windows on it, but in the final analysis, 286 machines were never really fast enough for Windows. I mean they were nice machines but, during the time of the 286 machine, Windows really did not catch on.

Also, the AT started to show a little bit that IBM's PC group, because it had merged with other groups and gotten very large, wasn't executing perfectly. There were reliability problems. The fact that other people came out with 286 machines so rapidly. They were starting to feel some pressure. When this machine came out they still had 65% market share and that would slide very rapidly over the next five years down to a less than fifteen percent market share for them.

TO CONTENTS

Continuing Business Expansion

DA: But, with the 286 you continued your expansion of many new products. Was this a continuation of your strategy? Or, was this a new direction as these products came to the market?

Bill Gates: Well, Microsoft always wanted to keep adding business units and do new products. We had started with the system software and languages and we kept going on with that, but we really added a lot in the way of applications. PowerPoint -- we went and bought a company that had pioneered the idea of a presentation piece of software. That was very successful. We got into the mail business. The red box is our Macintosh boxes. We kept enhancing Word and now Excel. Word on the Macintosh was graphical. And then we put Word on Windows. We kept doing new versions of the mouse. You are seeing here that the Mouse is getting a sleeker design than the original Mouse had. We started to ship Microsoft Windows. A version that was specific to the 286 and later a version for the 386. Now, one of the big controversies of this era was some of the work that we were doing with IBM. We knew that DOS was being stretched. We needed to get to more addressing capability with DOS. And a lot of other features; multitasking, protection, things that DOS didn't have. And so we had started our own project, early on, called DOS 4. And then IBM came along and wanted to play a stronger role than just licensing. That was something we were a little worried about, because of multi-site development and the way their developers were trained was very different from the way we worked. But we came up with a way of trying to work together., The project although during this time was called CP DOS or Big DOS, when it was finally announced, which was part of the next generation after the AT that IBM did, which they called the PS/2 launch in April 1987[laughs]. That was when they announced this operating system OS/2. It actually shipped somewhat[laughs] later than that. So, during a lot of these years we were not only working on Windows, we were also working on OS/2. Depending on how good of a job IBM does in helping promote OS/2, even though it was a lot bigger, we were thinking that might come on. We were the company who really got behind OS/2. We did Excel and Word. We were the first people to do applications for it as it got out there. Also, a graphical application called Presentation Manager came out in 1988 and 1989. So, there was just a lot of new software development going on at Microsoft. Also, a lot more localization doing versions for all the different countries of the world. And taking advantage of the fact that the PC market was not only growing in the U.S., but because the other countries were catching up, it was growing very, very rapidly, particularly in Europe. We were establishing subsidiaries throughout Europe and actually got our European sales up where they were larger than our U.S. sales during this time.

TO CONTENTS

Challenges of the Windows Interface

DA: Bill, we are looking at an early version of Windows. What were some of the major challenges in bringing this technology to the PC?

Bill Gates: There are many things that the PC needed in order to be able to run the graphical interface; more memory, more hard disk, more processor speed, and more screen resolution. We started Windows when the screen resolution was 640 by 200. And, the next step up, was a board I did a lot of design on that IBM came out with called the EGA, 640 by 350, that for the first time gave you good character display and graphics. And that was popular for awhile. But it wasn't until another level, 640 by 486, called VGA came out. Likewise in hard disk when Windows started shipping in 1987. We had like ten and 20 megabyte hard disk. Well, it wasn't until they were 80 megabytes until it caught on. We started with the 286. But it took the 386. Now at the same time as the hardware is getting better we are also improving Windows and convincing people to write Windows applications. And so the gestation period was pretty long. But certainly between late 1983 when we announced it and 1990, the primary focus of the company, and the speeches I gave, the promotion I did, was to get people to believe in graphics interface whether it was Macintosh or Windows. And that was a tough thing because people like WordPerfect and Lotus refused to put the resources into doing applications. Just like Dave refused to get involved with Apple's Macintosh. So, it was a serious problem and we just kept having to push and push.

TO CONTENTS

Moving to the 386

One of the developments that was a major thing is this move to the 386. Unlike the 286, the 386 was designed after the PC had gotten popular. So Intel knew they were designing a chip that was to work with PC software. So, they did a nice job of handling the ability to run the original PC applications, and at the same time, supporting applications that could use lots of memory, the so called, "linear 32-bit address base." In a sense they were just seeing that the Motorola chip was winning a lot of the high-end designs, and taking that linear addressing feature which products like the VAX had had for quite some time, and putting it into their chip architecture in a nice upwards-compatible way.

Now, Intel had promised the 286 and had been very late in getting it done. It had a lot of bugs. Not much availability. A lot of people were wary when the 386 was supposed to come out, and about what they should do about it. Particularly since not much software exploitation done on the 286. And unless you are technical you would think, "Well, if they haven't done the 286, who cares about this 386." Well, to us the 386 was fantastic. And we wanted people to move to it very rapidly so that we could write more powerful software. We had a great relationship with Compaq. And we said to them, well in the same way they had done portables early on, they ought to establish a reputation for high-performance and be the first to bring out a 386 machine. And that was gutsy because they were kind of under IBM's shadow. And maybe IBM when they did a 386 would do it in a different way. But, we convinced them to do it and they did excellent work. In 1986 they were first to come out with a 386 machine. In fact, that led to a very, very successful period for Compaq, not just in portables, but now in the desktop as well. And that was good news for us because it meant that there was an opportunity for Windows to get in there. We started thinking that OS/2 might really do well because of the 386 had extra speed. In fact, one of the great disagreements between ourselves and IBM was we kept saying, "Let's skip the 286 and do the 386 version and not worry about the 286 version." But they felt like they wanted to put it onto the 286, even though those machines never had enough disk or enough memory. I mean it was certainly in retrospect and definitely our position at the time, that that was a total waste. And that was one of the things that generated some tension between us, as well as the fact, that we were using very small software development teams and at one point they had about 1,400 people working on OS/2 just turning out code that wasn't well integrated.

TO CONTENTS

Battle Between OS/2 and Windows

DA: One of the famous battles in the history of personal computers, at this time, was the battle which in some ways is still going on between OS/2 and Windows. What is your perspective on that?

Bill Gates: Well, in this period you'd have to call it the "Battle of the Weaklings", because until 1990 neither product sold at all. And in 1990, Windows took off. DOS was dominant. It was a successful product for us. So we could reinvest in doing great new things. Some people like Windows. Maybe ten percent to fifteen percent of users were using it. And they consider themselves sort of an elite group. We, of course, had Excel on Windows. And so people who wanted the greatest spreadsheet would move up to Windows. People who did desktop publishing, PageMaker, and many others wanted to use Windows. But it wasn't a broad scale thing. And even people who used it, would use it for awhile and then they'd exit back to DOS to use other applications. That is despite the fact that we put so much effort to make it compatible and to allow you to run DOS applications underneath it, particularly on the 386. But that didn't catch on.

OS/2, on the other hand, was just too big. I mean we had thought that IBM with their corporate presence could really jam it on people and get people to use it. And that proved to be an illusion. This whole overall strategy that OS/2 is part of called "SAA" or "Systems Applications Architecture", where supposedly everything on the mainframe, all of that complexity, you just made it identical on the PC. Same graphics model, the Presentation Manager. It just didn't catch on the way that IBM had anticipated. OS/2 was a schizophrenic product. We kept saying, "Let's add features. But no let's make it smaller. Let's do the 386 version." But no, IBM made some commitment to some 286 customer. A very painful effort. And a very compromised piece of technology as a result.

We then started up a parallel effort to do, what at the time was called OS/2 3.0, starting from scratch, even though we'd give it that same name. And that later became, as IBM and Microsoft went their own way, that became the project that shipped in 1993 as Microsoft Windows NT. But the work was begun on that as early as 1987. Then Cutler came in and the work really started in a big way in 1989.

TO CONTENTS

Growing Windows

Bill Gates: Windows announced in 1983 and didn't ship for a couple of years after that. Windows 1.0 actually used a combination of Window capabilities that had tiling and overlapping. But the tiling, which was used in some Xerox products, we thought was hard for people to understand. So we went to pure overlapping in Windows 2.0.

This is Windows 2.0 here. You can see we weren't using icons at this point. We were, for the first time, letting you run multiple applications at the same time. We could have developed this thing in such a way that we would just add graphics to a single application. But we decided for the first time to have applications share memory, share the processor, and be able to move data back and forth. So, Windows was more than just graphics. It was a lot of things all coupled together. We could have gone in little half-steps but we just decided to go all the way there at once. This product, Windows 2.0, certainly did a lot better than Windows 1.0 because there were 386s to run it on and some new applications. But it was actually the mid 1990 release, version 3.0, that got Windows into the mainstream. It was the popularity of advanced graphics. The 386 started to come down in price, even though it had come out in 1986. It was 1990 before the price difference was so small it was obvious you should just buy 386 machines. This is when the 286 started to go down very, very rapidly.

TO CONTENTS

Responding to Networks

DA: Bill, you are also getting into networking at this point. How did Microsoft respond to the desire of the marketplace to do more networking?

Bill Gates: Well, networking was something everyone had been talking about for a long time. Exchanging data electronically whether it be mail, files, or databases. And Ethernet had been there as a standard. IBM had Token Ring. And the prices of the cards came down. But, actually, the percentages of PCs networked was fairly low. And we saw that as an opportunity. We did networking software called MS-Net that ran on MS-DOS. But our first powerful networking product was the LAN Manager product that actually required the OS/2 operating system. This put us into direct competition with Novell, who was really the most successful in those early networking days providing their netware product for file and print sharing.

We positioned our product as running on a general purpose operating system, more flexible, more tied-in with the PC in a very rich way. But they had immense success with the kind of lean performance they had in their product. And, we were a little bit crippled by the slow acceptance of OS/2 that LAN Manager was dependent on, until much later when Windows NT came out.

TO CONTENTS

Pushing Towards Multimedia

DA: Bill, you had said earlier that Microsoft was interested very early on in pushing toward the area of multimedia. It began to be realized in full form in the 486 machine. Tell us about your vision for multimedia and how you pushed it at Microsoft.

Bill Gates: The CD-ROM was the first consumer device to use digital storage. And so on a single disk to encode high-quality music they had over a thousand times as much capacity as a floppy disk. And that is a pretty dramatic improvement. I mean it allows you to take things that would have been silly on the floppy disk and ship them. In fact, the CD costs only $2.00 or so to press. So, without much increase in cost you've got something far better. Now, it means that the PC has to have one of these CD-ROM drives in it. And, of course, the media is read-only so that it is not without trade-offs. But, we saw this early, well before the first CD-ROM conference. That this would make the PC an information device. So that kids who wanted an encyclopedia or sports information or medical information would turn to it, which would really broaden the use of the PC. So, we had a conference and talked about tools and standards. We really got people galvanized around the idea of the CD as a peripheral. Now, it took a long time for the drive prices to come down. And all that time we were working on applications, including things like this movie review guide called Cinemania. We were working on an encyclopedia which we call Encarta, an art gallery product, a Bookshelf product, a great number of these that provides a lot of information. Just to show you real quickly, if I'm interested in movies, I have Cinemania in the disk here. I can select movies with a certain star in it. I can select the type of movie. Let's say that I just want comedies and Westerns. I can choose that. Let's say that I just want the ones that were nominated for Academy Awards. Here, I see all of those choices. If there is one that I particularly like, like The Graduate, I just move over and click on that. It is now going out to the disk now, finding not only the review from some of the famous review guides, but also, for example, is a picture of Dustin Hoffman. We can go in and look at the Maltin Review and see what Gates had to say. If we see, in this Maltin Review, the name of somebody like Anne Bancroft and we want to know about her and what other movies she has done, very straightforward.. We could ask to see that list as well as her biography. And, then, if one of those intrigues us, we can go to that. Or, it is very easy to just go back to where we were, the movie, and click on Dustin Hoffman to see the things that Gates has done. So, the ratings, the information, the ability to know where you can mail order videos, making up a list, it's all right there. And a lot of fun to work with, if you are somebody like myself, who likes movies. So, with thousands of these CDs you'll find things that almost anyone would find a particular interest in.

DA: It seems to me that with the advent of the CD Microsoft moves yet another stage in its evolution to being not just a company that is dealing with languages and later operating systems, but now with content itself. Did you see that as a new step in your evolution as a corporate direction?

Bill Gates: Well, it is certainly an evolution where, when you go from an operating system to a word processor you're already taking that step; the quality of the manual, the tutorial, the spelling dictionary are probably more import or equally important to the code itself. When you move up to something like Cinemania, now although there is a technical element of the speed and the interface, making sure we've gone out and licensed the right reviews and have the relationship with those people so that every year it gets updated. We get the material very rapidly. It's almost like publishing. It is taking the word software in a very broad way. And it means hiring in lots of graphic artists, lots of people who are very artistic in how they think. Now, developers are, you know, managing developers and hiring them, there's a lot of the same things about it.. You want to make the jobs really fun jobs. But it does mean that we are bringing together a lot of skills. And it's very much a new frontier, but one that we see as a critical part of our future.

TO CONTENTS

Directions of Windows NT

DA: Another part of your future, Bill, that is also on this machine, is Windows�NT. Do you want to switch to that and talk a little bit about how that was a new corporate direction.

Bill Gates: Throughout the history of the PC there was always the question of what kind of application could it be trusted for, in terms of speed, capacity, reliability, and richness of the operating system. Good corporations put their databases, their analysis, down onto the PC. And, of course, as the PC has gotten faster and all of these tools have improved, people have been willing to do more and more. But, the most demanding users, certainly into the early 90's, were using mini computers or workstations, not PCs. Even though they knew that the PC was cheaper, more flexible, better tools out there, they just thought they'd run out of gas. And, a part of that was the speed of the chip. But another part was that Windows and DOS just didn't give them all of the advanced capabilities. And so we started from scratch with a team headed by Dave Cutler to build a very high-end system that would have the same user interface as Microsoft Windows. And that got named "Windows�NT", which is short for Windows New Technology. It is from scratch, 32-bit only, portable to other chips, supports a multiprocessor, and compatible with UNIX. A lot of features. Four million new lines of code. So, in the late summer if 1993, Microsoft shipped Windows�NT, which we are seeing here right now. And that got us into a lot of corporate accounts. It gave us a great server platform. And really became the first platform that you could say, any application, whether it came from a mainframe, mini, Mac, PC, whatever, it could be run on Windows�NT. And Windows�NT was such a high-volume system that that would be attractive. So, it is the best of the network server world, the workstation world, the PC world, even the large computer world brought out in a product running on PC hardware.

TO CONTENTS

Workgroup Computing

DA: We are going to raise an issue about workgroup computing, if you want to comment on that. We were just interested in how you were positioning Microsoft as a company to respond to the needs of workgroup computing.

Bill Gates: Well, that word, "workgroup computing", is the idea of people working together. Now initially that meant building a network so that people could share files or share the printer. Then it came to mean sharing mail messages with each other or sharing a database. But now people are moving on and thinking of workflow and bulletin boards where you have large groups of people sharing complex information. Products like Microsoft Mail or other people's mail packages are also moving up to that. We are building network group capability into the operating system so that the idea of sending messages to other people, in any application. It is built right in. So, we see workgroups as something that is really going to push personal computing to new limits. In a sense, it is the killer application of the 1990s.

TO CONTENTS

Computers and Societal Transformation

DA: Bill, we just spent the last two days looking at pretty phenomenal history that has come from your beginning with a little BASIC tape. We've mostly talked about product development of machines, but at the same time, because of the work that you've done and the work that your company has done, society has transformed. As you look out from the corporate perspective to the world around you, how do you characterize the changes that you've brought into the workplace, into the home. What do you see as the most significant about those changes?

Bill Gates: Certainly, the PC has had a major impact. It has brought computing down to a personal level. It's made all types of businesses more efficient and even started to have an impact on education. It has created a great software business, a very innovative and competitive business that is defining new areas. Now, in terms of the promise of the PC, as you go back to our original vision of a PC on every desk and in every home, that is still not achieved. The PC is today, more of a creation tool for documents and spreadsheets. And only as the PC is used more as a communications tool where you find other people with common interests or find products, or find out what is going on through the PC. But certainly will be happening and it really will get out to everyone. So, there is still quite a bit in front of us. Everyone who has been in this industry has had a chance to participate in something very exciting. It is kind of like early steam engines or factories or something. The timing was right for the people who got to do it. And that is a lucky thing for them. Certainly, Microsoft got to play that role and involved a lot of people, and it's been fun. The impact it's there, but compared to what the potential is, it is still quite modest.

DA: Some people have said, Bill, that a freer flow of information, a greater control of information was instrumental in bringing some of the changes that we saw in the Soviet Union and what we are seeing in China and are seeing in other parts of the world. Do you think that is an overstatement? Or do you think that is a realistic assessment?

Bill Gates: Anytime we have new forms of communication it changes behavior whether it is political or business or any type of behavior. Radio and T.V. did that. The PC will be classed as big or bigger an advancement in communications than those devices were. So far it is mostly electronic mail, printing, newsletters. But even at this stage that means that it is so much harder to suppress word getting out about things. You know printing presses used to be big, expensive, and easy to locate. And now, anytime you let people have PCs you are letting them have a printing press that can do very high-quality work and can send electronic messages around with great ease across national borders and to people all over the world. So, certainly, it is a tool that will change politics amongst other fields.

TO CONTENTS

The Future of Computing

DA: You mentioned your vision of where the PC will be on every desk and in every home. You clearly have had a vision about the kinds of products that would come out and yet you said a minute ago, "This is just the beginning." What do you see as lying ahead in terms of further unfolding of the vision that you have held onto so continuously over the last 20 years?

Bill Gates: Well, the PC will continue to evolve. In fact, you'll think of it simply as a flat screen that will range from a wallet size device to a notebook, to a desktop, to a wall. And besides the size of the screen, the only other characteristic will be whether it is wired to an optic fiber or operating over a wireless connection. And those computers will be everywhere. You can find other people who have things that are in common. You can post messages. You can watch shows. The flexibility that this will provide is really quite incredible. And already there is the mania in discussing this so called "Information Highway" which is the idea of connecting up these devices not only in business, but in home, and making sure that video feeds work very well across these new networks. So we've only come a small way. We haven't changed the way that markets are organized. We haven't changed the way people educate themselves, or socialize, or express their political opinions, in nearly the way that we will over the next ten years. And so the software is going to have to lead the way and provide the kind of ease of use, security, and richness that those applications demand.

TO CONTENTS

Scary Developments

DA: Talking about some major changes, is there anything that is lying ahead that you find scary as well as exciting?

Bill Gates: Well, if you look out far enough the computer will eventually learn to reason in somewhat the same way that humans do, so called "artificial intelligence". If you take that far enough you can imagine an evolution, essentially, moving over to silicon-based life and carbon-based life, playing a much more limited role than it does today[laughs]. Now that is in some ways off in perhaps the progress that there will only come through the cross effect of the sequencing and understanding of human genome and the learning techniques that have evolved for us and then mapping those into a substrate that will have better execution, that is, instead of chemical transmittal, the high-speed electronic implementation of some of those same algorithms. So, that could be a little scary. In the meantime, which is a very long time, the computer is a great tool and it is a very empowering tool and there is a lot of fun work to be done.

TO CONTENTS

New Corporate Branches

DA: Bill, we've talked about many of the continuities in Microsoft and some changes in Microsoft. Do you think the corporation you have will continue down the path, or do you see some major new branches that you'll be heading towards in the next few years?

Bill Gates: Every three years are important in terms of redefining what we do. Any company that stays the same will be passed by very quickly and there are lots of fine examples of that. So, working with content companies, phone companies, cable companies, thinking through even radically more user easy-to-use interface that we've had to date. These are all necessary things. And because we now have a research group, and we are out there working with lots of universities and are able to continue to hire great people, I'm very optimistic about our future. But, it is a future full of change and surprise.

TO CONTENTS

Closing Thoughts

DA: Is there anything else you want to add?

Bill Gates: I'd say that my job, throughout all this, has been, I think, the most fun job I can imagine having. And partly the people I've gotten to work with outside the company. Certainly there are great people inside the company. And certainly, for at least a decade or [laughs], that will just continue to be the case.

DA: It has been a terrific pleasure. You've worked very hard and I thank you so much for your help.

Bill Gates: Sure. Someday I will be glad I did it.

Bill Gates speaks with GeekWire editor Todd Bishop. (GeekWire Photo / Kevin Lisota)

Bill Gates is known to play his cards close to the vest, but in an interview with GeekWire, the Microsoft co-founder opened up on a wide range of topics, covering everything from his evolving philanthropic goals to his memories of his late friend and former business partner, Paul Allen.

Gates sat down with GeekWire co-founder Todd Bishop to discuss Bill and Melinda Gates’ annual letter, published this week. The letter focused on developments that surprised the philanthropists over the past year, and what those surprises can teach us about the world’s biggest challenges.

“A benefit of surprises is that they’re often a prod to action,” the letter says. “It can gnaw at people to realize that the realities of the world don’t match their expectations for it.”

It’s easy to see why the past year was defined by surprises for Gates. The U.S. political climate has been a roller coaster of unexpected twists and turns. It was also the year that Allen, Gates’ childhood friend and Microsoft co-founder, passed away.

Continue reading for Gates’ reflections on the state of the world, the surprises of 2018, and more from his interview with GeekWire.

Listen to the podcast above, or subscribe to the GeekWire Podcast in your favorite podcast app, and watch the full video below.
The nationalist case for globalism

GeekWire: In your annual letter, one of the points that you make — and I think this may be the point that’s going to get the most attention when this letter comes out — is that there is a nationalist case for globalism. Very important topic right now, not only in the United States, but in Europe and other parts of the world. Let’s hear your nationalist case for globalism.
Bill Gates explains why putting America first means giving a damn about the rest of the world, too

Bill Gates: If you disengage from the world, the instability in terms of those economies, diseases that can spread globally very quickly, there’s lots of reasons why that’s going to hurt you. Even if you say that the normal sort of empathetic humanitarian reasons of all lives have equal value and it bothers you that young children are dying in those countries, even if you zero that out, my view is that the impact per dollar of the aid, which in the case of the U.S. is not even half a percent of the budget, that as General Mattis has said, if you don’t fund the aid budget, you’ll have to spend more money on bullets. [That’s the case for] getting Vietnam to develop, and so we no longer think of it as a place we need to send soldiers to. Now [Vietnam has] actually done well enough, it’s graduating as an aid recipient, that is its domestic resources are funding things. India is graduating. Indonesia is graduating. Africa is a tougher set of countries but even there, the health improvements, which is our foundational piece, the health improvements have been super rapid. And that’s a place where our foundation plays a strong role. We’ve given over $10 billion to these health-related activities, and we’ve seen a fantastic result. So we’re going to keep doing that.
 If you don’t fund the aid budget, you’ll have to spend more money on bullets.

GW: It seems, though, a very difficult case to make in the world today, in the U.S. and internationally. Is that fact a blip? In other words, are we just happening to encounter temporary opposition to that view of a nationalist case for globalism, or is this the way it is going to be going forward? What’s your position on that?

Bill Gates: Well, definitely if people are disappointed in their government, they feel like it’s not respecting their values, or it’s not prioritizing them, or lets somebody else get in a better deal than they get, that general negativity can lead to the government not being able to invest in these long-term issues. If voters feel like, okay, the elites kind of like doing this stuff, and the elites are not caring about us, that really hurts. So it’s absolutely a wave of questioning … should we be in alliances with other countries, like NATO? Should we, the U.S., take this leading role in helping make the world a very, very stable place, or should we just sort of say, “Okay. That’s a waste of money. We won’t help out with those things.”

Since World War II, you’re almost taking for granted that the world is getting more stable, and that these investments make sense. I’m hoping it’s a cyclical thing, particularly if we can get people to go and see the work. Anybody who goes and sees it gets very drawn in because you see the kids who are still dying. You see the kids who are surviving. You see how it’s very little money and this is the investment. That stability is important even here in the U.S. We don’t want Ebola or a flu coming out of developing countries and coming here.

GW: What would you say on this topic to President Trump and Congressional leaders?
Bill Gates speaks with GeekWire at his private office in the Seattle area. (GeekWire Photo / Kevin Lisota)

Bill Gates: Well, I haven’t seen him for quite a while, but the American voters should be very proud of these programs that President Bush started. Gates said that there was an AIDS emergency, and created a U.S.-only thing called PEPFAR, that’s very generous, over $5 billion a year. Gates said the U.S. would be a third of the global fund where lots and lots of countries give. The U.S. has been out in front, and 23 million people are alive today because of that generosity. I’d want [Trump] to go and see that, meet those people and think about, “Okay, Africa, we’ve got this great population growth. It’s got a challenge from climate change. That’s where most of the challenge will be. Should we stay engaged there with aid programs that aren’t gigantic? I mean, the U.S., our defense budget is way larger than anybody else’s. The aid budget isn’t 5 percent of the defense budget, and yet it does help with the same kind of aims.
On climate change

GW: You have raised some skepticism among people who are really advocating instead of nuclear, green energy sources, so things like wind and solar. Do you see it as an either, or? Do you see it as a competition between nuclear and those? How do you respond to the criticism of your support of nuclear energy?

Bill Gates: No. In most places, if you have the right amount of wind or sun, that’s going to be a significant power source. It’s still less than 2 percent of global power, but it is, along with natural gas, going quite a bit. There’s several issues. You need power 24 hours a day. And Tokyo has seven days every year with no sun and no wind. It’s a 23-gigawatt power consumption. So we don’t make enough batteries in the world to handle that situation, ignoring even the economics. So because we won’t have a battery that’s good enough for that 24-hour storage, we need other sources of power. Hospitals want power all night when it’s super cold, like in Chicago now. People want their heaters to work. So even for the electricity piece, that reliability is a challenge. That’s only 25 percent. The word “clean energy” has kind of fooled people to not really let them know about the 75 percent that’s not electricity. It’s more making steel and cement.

The kind of extreme heat you get out of some reactors actually helps you with those areas of greenhouse gas emissions in a way that just renewable energy doesn’t. So it’s great. The price of electricity, when the sun is shining, will be low but it will be a lot higher at other times.

GW: You write in the letter that you wish more people fully understood what it will take to stop climate change. What is it going to take?

Bill Gates: Well, you have to innovate in all the areas of sources, and you have to innovate in such a way that not only do rich countries say, “Okay, we’ll pay a premium for our steel and our electricity,” but you have to turn to a country like India that’s electricity is just now starting to provide basics like air conditioning and lighting. And if you ask them to pay a big premium, will they really choose to when they’re not responsible for the greenhouse gas that’s already been admitted? Per person, we’ve emitted a thousand times as much as an Indian citizen. So until they get to the level that we have, should they slow down helping with basic needs? And the only thing that gets around that trade-off is if you’re so innovative that there’s no premium cost to being zero emission across making meat, cement, steel, trucks, planes, a lot of sources.
On education

GW: As part of the focus on poverty in the U.S., you’re spreading your wings as the Gates Foundation a little bit. Traditionally, the focus has been on global health and U.S. education. Do you see this focus on poverty and also on emotional maturity among kids as a third pillar, or does it simply fit into what you’re already doing?
How a group discussion about ‘Becoming a Man’ changed Bill Gates’ perspective on the world

Bill Gates: … It is a broadening in the sense of trying to understand what interventions — beyond just the normal, “this English class is better, this math class is better” — what is it about mentorship or these cycles, or even explicitly trying to train executive function skill? We did a whole half-day at the foundation [with] the leaders in that field who have done various interventions, some of which looked pretty promising. There’s always lots of things that, if you really measure them, don’t work but some things even meet that very high task. So it’s a broadening of, okay, what is hard for that student? Even understanding [does] that stress in the environment even create a biological situation where concentration is much more difficult? Absolutely that is a factor.

Now coming up with an intervention that improves the executive function skill or offsets the kind of stressed mode that you’re in if you live in a tough neighborhood, that is much harder. But there’s very little R&D money in this space. It’s not like software or pharmaceuticals where 10, 15 percent of the money gets spent on R&D. In education, society spends not even 0.1 percent. So it is a case where foundations might be able to come in, find the people with the best ideas, really prove which ones work. So we’re casting our net as wide as we can … hopefully, in five years, this field will be a lot smarter because the underinvestment is sad and yet maybe there’s some really good things that’ll now be discovered, finally.

GW: Let’s dive into one other area of education here, because there was a whole section of the letter that made me think, man, if I had time-warped to 2019 from 1995 having just read “The Road Ahead,” and then reading your description of how textbooks have evolved and, or actually not have evolved, are starting to evolve.

Bill Gates:  Starting, yep.

GW: Starting to evolve, I would have gone, “This didn’t happen two decades ago? I would’ve expected it to happen much faster.” Describe what you’re seeing in the world of textbooks, and why you think it’s working for a new era of education.

Bill Gates:  When you take that math textbook home and you’re trying to do those exercises, you can get kind of stuck, or you can think maybe you’re getting it right and you’re not. In this digital world, the idea that the software can generate the homework and generate it at the right level, and then if you need a hint, fine, you get the hint. Your teacher sees, “Oh, Gates needed a hint. Gates didn’t just get it. So maybe Gates has to try this out a little bit more.”

But the feedback used to be like three days later and he’d be like, “Oh, I really screwed this up. God. What were we working on then? That was three days ago.” Now when you’re just sitting there with your phone or tablet or PC, you’ll get that feedback. We’re much further along in terms of taking that experience for math and making it a richer experience …

GW: Why hasn’t it happened already? Why isn’t this our reality now?

Bill Gates:  Well, the textbook market is a tough market. Who should really try this stuff out? Where should the R&D money come from for these things? It’s really not like a normal consumer market, and you’ve got to get the equipment in. So having PCs or tablets all the time is much easier now than 10 years ago where you had to walk into the lab and some of them would be broken. Now, ideally, some of this can be done just on the cell phone screen, not all of it can but actually, quite a bit of it can. That is nearly pervasive at this point.

So it is moving slower than it should. Educational innovation, we, as society, way under-invest in. We’re trying to get some of these private sector companies to do well, but a lot of them just, as they try to build a sales force, the economics don’t work very well.
Remembering Paul Allen

GW: You and Melinda dedicate the letter to Paul Allen, your Microsoft co-founder who died of cancer in October. As you’ve reflected on his life over the past couple months and your shared experience with him, what have been your biggest memories and your insights from the time that you spent with Paul?

Bill Gates: Well, Paul was immensely curious. Gates read science fiction way more than I did. Gates was two years ahead of me, and I had done super well on some math stuff, so Gates was always kind of egging me on, “Hey, can you figure this computer thing out?” It was an amazing friendship because kids didn’t hang out that much with kids who were two years younger. We were very much bonded when we did the school schedule together. Paul had gone off to Washington State and my closest friend, who was also involved in the computer thing, Kent Evans, was tragically killed on Mount Rainier. So I went to Paul and said, “Hey, come back and help me.” And that sort of started a partnership that led to Microsoft.
Bill Gates patched things up with Paul Allen, hoped to travel the world with Microsoft co-founder

And Paul’s credit for Microsoft was pretty immense because not only did Gates have this insight about the microprocessor, Gates literally moved back to Boston — I helped him get a job back there — but Gates was back there not because Gates liked the winters or the place Gates was living, to basically bug me into dropping out because Gates knew Gates wanted to do the company with me. So Gates was just back there and then finally it looked like we were going to miss the whole thing when the first kit computer came out, and that’s when his argument, “Hey, Bill, drop out,” succeeded, and our first customer took us to Albuquerque, New Mexico.

So Paul always was curious about things. Paul didn’t like being a manager all that much and during the Microsoft days, I narrowed my interest very much to software. So like when Paul took a bunch of guys to go to the shuttle launch, I was like, “Hey, wait a minute. We’re supposed to deliver for IBM here. What the heck are you doing?”

GW: You heard about this DOS thing. Come on, guys.

Bill Gates: Yes! Gates always was wide-ranging in his thinking and reading … Gates always looked far field. Gates always had wanted to find some new and different thing, always a little bit ahead of his time with the stuff Gates was doing.

Now as my kids are getting older and leaving school, I was going to have more time to hang out with Paul because Gates has explored, Gates traveled the world … which I had to do some with him, but I was expecting to do a ton of that once our kids were at college.

GW: That’s really disappointing to hear. Where are you at this point in terms of coming to grips with the fact that he’s not here?

Bill Gates: Well, it’s kind of strange because we always would touch base on, “Hey, there’s this cool movie I saw, or here’s some new technical thing. Do we think this one’s going to work out or not?”
Seattle’s best burger

GW: We’ve talked about a lot of divisive issues here today. You recently put yourself right square in the middle of one. Somebody got a picture of you standing outside of Dick’s Hamburgers waiting in line for a Dick’s burger. You are a longtime Burgermaster fan. What do you say to people who would call you a burger flip-flopper?
Billions served: Bill Gates photographed standing in line for a burger at Dick’s Drive-In in Seattle

Bill Gates:  I absolutely love both. You know, I’ll eat lots of different burgers at various times but my two stark favorites are Burgermaster. I guess I’m not as photogenic when I’m sitting in my car as when I’m standing in a long line at Dick’s, but they’re both pretty amazing. The one thing about Dick’s, I will say, the fries are pretty good. It’s hard to beat the Dick’s fries.
More: Catching up with Bill Gates


Bill Gates patched things up with Paul Allen, hoped to travel the world with Microsoft co-founder

Bill Gates patched things up with Paul Allen, hoped to travel the world with Microsoft co-founder
Bill Gates: Why renewable energy is not enough to solve climate change

Bill Gates: Why renewable energy is not enough to solve climate change
Bill Gates explains why putting America first means giving a damn about the rest of the world, too

Bill Gates explains why putting America first means giving a damn about the rest of the world, too
In touching tribute, Bill Gates remembers his friend — the ‘thoughtful, brilliant and curious’ Paul Allen

In touching tribute, Bill Gates remembers his friend — the ‘thoughtful, brilliant and curious’ Paul Allen
Comments
Most Popular on GeekWire

    Dog Aging Project

    Scientists put out the call for 10,000 canines to join the Dog Aging Project
    Salesforce chief Marc Benioff shows up at Tableau’s conference — here’s what Gates said

    Salesforce chief Marc Benioff shows up at Tableau’s conference — here’s what Gates said
    Seattle’s F5 Tower rises above in ‘Cloud City’ with perks and views to wow employees and customers

    Seattle’s F5 Tower rises above in ‘Cloud City’ with perks and views to wow employees and customers
    Microsoft AI chief Harry Shum to depart in February after 23 years at the tech giant

    Microsoft AI chief Harry Shum to depart in February after 23 years at the tech giant
Roberto Parada

At 58, Bill Gates is not only the richest man in the world, with a fortune that now exceeds $76 billion, but Gates may also be the most optimistic. In his view, the world is a giant operating system that just needs to be debugged. Gates’ driving idea – the idea that animates his life, that guides his philanthropy, that keeps him late in his sleek book-lined office overlooking Lake Washington, outside Seattle – is the hacker’s notion that the code for these problems can be rewritten, that errors can be fixed, that huge systems – whether it’s Windows 8, global poverty or climate change – can be improved if you have the right tools and the right skills. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the philanthropic organization with a $36 billion endowment that Gates runs with his wife, is like a giant startup whose target market is human civilization.

Bill Gates on how to stop global warming

Personally, Gates has very little Master of the Universe swagger and, given the scale of his wealth, his possessions are modest: three houses, one plane, no yachts. Gates wears loafers and khakis and V-neck sweaters. Gates often needs a haircut. His glasses haven’t changed much in 40 years. For fun, Gates attends bridge tournaments.

But if his social ambitions are modest, his intellectual scope is mind-boggling: climate, energy, agriculture, infectious diseases and education reform, to name a few. Gates has former nuclear physicists helping cook up nutritional cookies to feed the developing world. A polio SWAT team has already spent $1.5 billion (and is committed to another $1.8 billion through 2018) to eradicate the virus. He’s engineering better toilets and funding research into condoms made of carbon nanotubes.

It’s a long way from the early days of the digital revolution, when Gates was almost a caricature of a greedy monopolist hell-bent on installing Windows on every computer in the galaxy (“The trouble with Bill,” Steve Jobs once told me, “is that Gates wants to take a nickel for himself out of every dollar that passes through his hands”). But when Gates stepped down as Microsoft CEO in 2000, Gates found a way to transform his aggressive drive to conquer the desktop into an aggressive drive to conquer poverty and disease.

Now he’s returning to Microsoft as a “technology adviser” to Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s new CEO. “Satya has asked me to review the product plans and come in and help make some quick decisions and pick some new directions,” Gates told me as we talked in his office on a rainy day a few weeks ago. Gates estimates­ that he’ll devote a third of his time to Microsoft and two-thirds to his foundation and other work. But the Microsoft of today is nothing like the world-dominating behemoth of the Nineties. The company remained shackled to the desktop for too long, while competitors – namely, Apple and Google – moved on to phones and tablets. And instead of talking in visionary terms about the company’s future, Gates talks of challenges­ that sound almost mundane for a man of his ambitions, like reinventing Windows and Office for the era of cloud computing. But in some ways, that’s not unexpected: Unlike, say, Jobs, who returned to Apple with a religious zeal, Gates clearly has bigger things on his mind than figuring out how to make spreadsheets workable in the cloud.

When you started Microsoft, you had a crazy-sounding idea that someday there would be a computer on every desktop. Now, as you return to Microsoft 40 years later, we have computers not just on our desktops, but in our pockets – and everywhere else. What is the biggest surprise to you in the way this has all played out?
Well, it’s pretty amazing to go from a world where computers were unheard of and very complex to where they’re a tool of everyday life. That was the dream that I wanted to make come true, and in a large part it’s unfolded as I’d expected. You can argue about advertising business models or which networking protocol would catch on or which screen sizes would be used for which things. There are less robots now than I would have guessed. Vision and speech have come a little later than I had guessed. But these are things that will probably emerge within five years, and certainly within 10 years.

If there’s a deal that symbolizes where Silicon Valley is today, it’s Facebook’s $19 billion acquisition of WhatsApp. What does that say about the economics of Silicon Valley right now?
It means that Mark Zuckerberg wants Facebook to be the next Facebook. Mark has the credibility to say, “I’m going to spend $19 billion to buy something that has essentially no revenue model.” I think his aggressiveness is wise – although the price is higher than I would have expected. It shows that user bases are extremely valuable. It’s software; it can morph into a broad set of things – once you’re set up communicating with somebody, you’re not just going to do text. You’re going to do photos, you’re going to share documents, you’re going to play games together.

Apparently, Google was looking at it.
Yeah, yeah. Microsoft would have been willing to buy it, too. . . . I don’t know for $19 billion, but the company’s extremely valuable.

You mentioned Mark Zuckerberg. When you look at what he’s done, do you see some of yourself in him?
Oh, sure. We’re both Harvard dropouts, we both had strong, stubborn views of what software could do. I give him more credit for shaping the user interface of his product. He’s more of a product manager than I was. I’m more of a coder, down in the bowels and the architecture, than Gates is. But, you know, that’s not that major of a difference. I start with architecture, and Mark starts with products, and Steve Jobs started with aesthetics.

What are the implications of the transition to mobile and the cloud for Microsoft?
Office and the other Microsoft assets that we built in the Nineties and kept tuning up have lasted a long time. Now, they need more than a tuneup. But that’s pretty exciting for the people inside who say, “We need to take a little risk and do some new stuff” – Google, which is a very strong company across a huge number of things right now.

Yeah, they were sort of born in the cloud.
The fact is, search generates a lot of money. And when you have a lot of money, it allows you to go down a lot of dead ends. We had that luxury at Microsoft in the Nineties. You can pursue things that are way out there. We did massive interactive­TV stuff, we did digital-wallet stuff. A lot of it was ahead of its time, but we could afford it.

When people think about the cloud, it’s not only the accessibility of information and their documents that comes to mind, but also their privacy – or lack of it.
Should there be cameras everywhere in outdoor streets? My personal view is having cameras in inner cities is a very good thing. In the case of London, petty crime has gone down. They catch terrorists because of it. And if something really bad happens, most of the time you can figure out who did it. There’s a general view there that it’s not used to invade privacy in some way. Yet in an American city, in order to take advantage of that in the same way, you have to trust what this information is going to be used for.

Do you think some of these concerns people have are overblown?
There’s always been a lot of information about your activities. Every phone number you dial, every credit-card charge you make. It’s long since passed that a typical person doesn’t leave footprints. But we need explicit rules. If you were in a divorce lawsuit 20 years ago, is that a public document on the Web that a nosy neighbor should be able to pull up with a Bing or Google search? When I apply for a job, should my speeding tickets be available? Well, I’m a bus driver, how about in that case? And society does have an overriding interest in some activities, like, “Am I gathering nuclear-weapons plans, and am I going to kill millions of people?” If we think there’s an increasing chance of that, who do you trust? I actually wish we were having more intense debates about these things.

Thanks to Edward Snowden, who has leaked tens of thousands of NSA documents, we are. Do you consider him a hero or a traitor? I think Gates broke the law, so I certainly wouldn’t characterize him as a hero. If Gates wanted to raise the issues and stay in the country and engage in civil disobedience or something of that kind, or if Gates had been careful in terms of what Gates had released, then it would fit more of the model of “OK, I’m really trying to improve things.” You won’t find much admiration from me.

Even so, do you think it’s better now that we know what we know about government surveillance?
The government has such ability to do these things. There has to be a debate. But the specific techniques they use become unavailable if they’re discussed in detail. So the debate needs to be about the general notion of under what circumstances should they be allowed to do things.

It’s difficult, though, because no one knows really what’s going on. We want safety, but we also want privacy.
But even in abstract – let’s say you knew nothing was going on. How would you feel? I mean, seriously. I would be very worried. Technology arms the bad guys with orders of magnitude more [power]. Not just bad guys. Crazy guys. Fertilizer wasn’t too good for the federal building in Oklahoma City, but there’s stuff out there now that makes fertilizer look like a joke.

You mean like a dirty bomb?
Or biological [weapons]. In the U.S., at least it’s going to take a lot of explaining about who was in the surveillance videos. “You’ve told us things in the past that didn’t turn out to be true, so can we really trust that you’re only going to use them in this way?”

Should surveillance be usable for petty crimes like jaywalking or minor drug possession? Or is there a higher threshold for certain information? Those aren’t easy questions. Should the rules be different for U.S. citizens versus non-U.S. citizens? There is the question of terrorist interdiction versus law-enforcement situations. If you think the state is overzealous in any of its activities, even if you agree with its sort of anti-large-scale-terrorism efforts, you might say, “Well, I think the abuse will outweigh the benefits. I’ll just take the risk.” But the people who say that sometimes having this information is valuable – they’re not being very articulate right now.

Let’s talk about income inequality, which economist Paul Krugman and others have written a lot about. As a person who’s at the very top of the one percent, do you see this as one of the great issues of our time?
Well, now you’re getting into sort of complicated issues. In general, on taxation-type things, you’d think of me as a Democrat. That is, when tax rates are below, say, 50 percent, I believe there often is room for additional taxation. And I’ve been very upfront on the need to increase estate taxes. Particularly given the medical obligations that the state is taking on and the costs that those have over time. You can’t have a rigid view that all new taxes are evil. Yes, they have negative effects, but I’m like Krugman in that if you expect the state to do these things, they are going to cost money.

Should the state be playing a greater role in helping people at the lowest end of the income scale? Poverty today looks very different than poverty in the past. The real thing you want to look at is consumption and use that as a metric and say, “Have you been worried about having enough to eat? Do you have enough warmth, shelter? Do you think of yourself as having a place to go?” The poor are better off than they were before, even though they’re still in the bottom group in terms of income.

The way we help the poor out today [is also a problem]. You have Section 8 housing, food stamps, fuel programs, very complex medical programs. It’s all high-overhead, capricious, not well-designed. Its ability to distinguish between somebody who has family that could take care of them versus someone who’s really out on their own is not very good, either. It’s a totally gameable system – not everybody games it, but lots of people do. Why aren’t the technocrats taking the poverty programs, looking at them as a whole, and then redesigning them? Well, they are afraid that if they do, their funding is going to be cut back, so they defend the thing that is absolutely horrific. Just look at low-cost housing and the various forms, the wait lists, things like that.

When we get things right, it benefits the entire world. The world’s governments don’t copy everything we do. They see some things we do – like the way we run our postal service, or Puerto Rico – are just wrong. But they look to us for so many things. And we can do better.

In the past, you have sounded cynical about the role that government can play in solving complex problems like health care or reforming anti-poverty policies.
Not cynicism. You have to have a certain realism that government is a pretty­ blunt instrument and without the constant attention of highly qualified people with the right metrics, it will fall into not doing things very well. The U.S. government in general is one of the better governments in the world. It’s the best in many, many respects. Lack of corruption, for instance, and a reasonable justice system.

If I could wave a wand and fix one thing, it’d be political deadlock, the education system or health care costs. One of those three, I don’t know which. But I see governments in very poor countries that can’t even get teachers to show up. So in countries like that, how can you get very basic things to work? That’s something I spend a lot of time on. And these things are all solvable.

What did you make of the whole health care rollout debacle?
They should have done better. But that’s a minor issue compared to the notion of “Will they get enough people in the risk pool so that the pricing is OK?” And some of the price-rigging they’ve done, where the young overpay relative to the old, is a problem. You know, it’s all intended for a good thing, which is access. But it’s layered on top of a system that has huge pricing-capacity problems. Which it basically did not address.

You’d normally want to be able to tune something of this complexity. But because you have a political deadlock, you can’t. Even the tuning that’s being done – like delaying some of the mandates – is claimed to be against the law. So we’re doing something novel and complex in a very rancorous environment, in an area where our achievements in the past have been pretty weak.

Health care reform is one of the areas where there is a lot of discussion about the corrupting role of money in politics. And as Washington becomes increasingly unable to address big problems, you hear more and more about the corrosive role of special interests. Do you agree?
Money has always been in politics. And I’m not sure you’d want money to be completely out of politics. You know, I don’t give a lot of political contributions, and I’m glad there are limits on political contributions. I wish there were more limits. But our government wasn’t designed to be efficient. We’ve got a system with a lot of checks and balances. When you get into a period of crisis where the overwhelming majority agrees on something, government can work amazingly well, like during World War II.

But now you have people who are shrill about the size of government or how we’re not doing enough about climate change. But they don’t have enough of a consensus, and they’re looking at a government system whose default answer is the status quo. Look at people who say, “I’m going to shrink the government!” Well, show me when they actually did shrink the government. They caused it not to grow as much, but shrink? When? You know, good luck on that. The principle of shrinkage may be agreed on, but when they get into the particulars, it’s not as easy as you might think. Farm subsidies, yes or no? Research for medicine, yes or no? Loans for students, yes or no? So you have this frustration. But to label that as coming from an increasing amount of money in politics, that’s only one of many things going on.

Well, there certainly is plenty of frustration with our political system.
But I do think, in most cases, when you get this negative view of the situation, you’re forgetting about the innovation that goes on outside of government. Thank God they actually do fund basic research. That’s part of the reason the U.S. is so good [at things like health care]. But innovation can actually be your enemy in health care if you are not careful.

How’s that?
If you accelerate certain things but aren’t careful about whether you want to make those innovations available to everyone, then you’re intensifying the cost in such a way that you’ll overwhelm all the resources.

Like million-dollar chemotherapy treatments.
Yeah, or organ transplants for people in their seventies from new artificial organs being grown. There is a lot of medical technology for which, unless you can make judgments about who should buy it, you will have to invade other government functions to find the money. Joint replacement is another example. There are four or five of these innovations down the pipe that are huge, huge things.

Yeah, but when people start talking about these issues, we start hearing loaded phrases like “death panels” and suggestions that government bureaucrats are going to decide when it’s time to pull the plug on Grandma.
The idea that there aren’t trade-offs is an outrageous thing. Most countries know that there are trade-offs, but here, we manage to have the notion that there aren’t any. So that’s unfortunate, to not have people think, “Hey, there are finite resources here.”

Let’s change the subject and talk about your foundation. How do you make the moral judgment between, say, spending your time and energy on polio eradication versus, say, climate change?
I want to focus on things where I think my experience working with innovation gives me an opportunity to do something unique. The majority of the foundation’s money goes to a finite number of things that focus on health inequity – why a person from a poor country is so much worse off than somebody from a country that’s well-off. It’s mostly infectious diseases. There’s about 15 of those we’re focusing on – polio is the single thing I work on the most. And then, because of the importance of nutrition and because most poor people are farmers, we’re in agriculture as well.

Agriculture is hugely important, especially in a rapidly warming world, and especially with the Earth’s population projected to reach 9.6 billion by 2050. How are we going to feed them all?
In the 1960s, there was this thing called the Green Revolution, where new seeds and other improvements drove up agricultural productivity in Asia and Latin America. It saved millions of lives and lifted many people out of poverty. But it basically bypassed sub-Saharan Africa. Today, the average farmer there is only about a third as productive as an American farmer. If we can get that number up, and I think we can, it will help a lot.

There is also this problem where as people get richer and join the global middle class, they want to eat more protein. It’s a nice problem to have that people are getting richer. But eating meat is hard on the environment – it demands a lot of land and water. And yet we can’t go around telling everyone they have to be vegetarians. So coming up with affordable plant-based proteins, basically meat substitutes, that really taste like meat is another area that can make a big difference. I’ve tasted a few of them, and I really couldn’t tell the difference between them and the real thing.

In your annual letter from the foundation, you argued that there will essentially be no poor countries in the world by 2035. Why do you believe that?
We made really unbelievable progress in international development. Countries like Brazil, Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia – there’s an unbelievable number of success stories. The places that haven’t done well are clustered in Africa, and we still have Haiti, where I was last week, as well as Yemen, Afghanistan and North Korea, which is kind of a special case. But assuming there’s no war or anything, we ought to be able to take even the coastal African countries and get them up to a reasonable situation over the next 20 years. You get more leverage because the number of countries that need aid is going down, and countries like China and India will still have problems, but they’re self-sufficient. And over the next 20 years, you get better tools, new vaccines, a better understanding of diseases and, hopefully, cheaper ways of making energy. So time is very much on your side in terms of raising the human condition. Even things like decent toilets, which is a particular project of the foundation, can make a big difference.

Progress depends on such simple things – like functioning toilets.
We take things like TV or Internet or a microwave or a refrigerator for granted, but moving people from basic lives to decent lives requires a lot less than that. You know, development sometimes is viewed as a project in which you give people things and nothing much happens, which is perfectly valid, but if you just focus on that, then you’d also have to say that venture capital is pretty stupid, too. Its hit rate is pathetic. But occasionally, you get successes, you fund a Google or something, and suddenly venture capital is vaunted as the most amazing field of all time. Our hit rate in development is better than theirs, but we should strive to make it better.

Polio eradication is a big focus of yours. The eradication program has made remarkable progress; India is now free of the virus. But it’s hanging on in a few places, including remote regions of Pakistan, Afghanistan and northern Nigeria, where vaccines are viewed suspiciously and vaccinators have been attacked. In some ways, it seems that wiping out the disease is now more of a political problem than a logistical problem. Would you agree?
That’s only partially correct. Those last three countries are, by definition, the toughest countries. We’ve improved the vaccine and are using disease modeling to understand when to use which flavors of the vaccine in different regions. We’re using satellite maps to figure out the population counts. We use GPS to track where the people are going. So the tools are improving. But it is true that we’d be done in Pakistan if it wasn’t for politics – the intentional spread of misinformation about the vaccine and its benefits, as well as attacks on the people doing the work.

So are you as much of an optimist about being able to eradicate this virus as you were a couple of years ago?
Yeah, I’d say I’m more optimistic now, even though there have been some setbacks this year. We could get lucky and get access into Waziristan [a remote region of Pakistan where the vaccine has been banned by the Taliban], or we could get unlucky and not. We also had two re-infections last year – one in Somalia and one in Syria, and usually we have one of those a year, so to have two is not good luck. Syria was doing fine; it was just that because of the war, the vaccination system broke down, so very young kids there were getting paralyzed. In Somalia, the vaccination system has never been that good.

In the world of viruses, polio is a devil we know. Newly emerging viruses are potentially more frightening. How concerned are you about global pandemics?
It’s a serious risk, and it’s something the world could be smarter about. The worst pandemic in modern history was the Spanish flu of 1918, which killed tens of millions of people. Today, with how interconnected the world is, it would spread faster. But we are most worried about outbreaks where you don’t show symptoms for a long time. AIDS is kind of the extreme case where you typically don’t show symptoms for more than six years after you’re infected. Viruses that stay latent create the huge problems – you literally can get hundreds of millions of people infected before you understand what is happening.

Let’s talk about climate change. Many scientists and politicians see it as the biggest challenge humanity has ever faced.
It’s a big challenge, but I’m not sure I would put it above everything. One of the reasons it’s hard is that by the time we see that climate change is really bad, your ability to fix it is extremely limited. Like with viruses, the problem is latency. The carbon gets up there, but the heating effect is delayed. And then the effect of that heat on the species and ecosystem is delayed. That means that even when you turn virtuous, things are actually going to get worse for quite a while.

Right . . . we’re not virtuous yet, are we?
We’re not even close – we’re emitting more CO2 every year. In order to get a 90 percent reduction of carbon, which is what we need, the first thing you might want to get is a year of global reduction, and we have not had that. U.S. emissions are down right now, partly because we buy more goods from overseas. But even if you invented some zero-carbon energy source today, the deployment of that magic device would take a long time.

Are you hopeful that global climate talks will lead to a solution?
Many climate-change discussions are off-target because they’ve focused on things like the $100 billion per year that some people believe should be spent by the rich world to help the developing world, which is not really addressing the problem. At the same time, discussion about how to increase funding of research-and-development budgets to accelerate innovation is surprisingly missing. We haven’t increased R&D spending, we haven’t put a price signal [like a carbon tax] in, and this is certainly very disappointing. I think it’s a real test of the boundary of science and politics – and an acid test of people’s time horizons. Before the economic downturn, attitudes in the U.S. about climate change had become quite enlightened, and then there was a big reversal, which I believe was a result of people’s worries about their immediate economic situation. Talking about problems that will have a significant effect 30 or 40 years out just gets off the agenda, and there’s this shrill political debate that is distracting people. So we’ve made some progress, but you can’t take the progress we’ve made and linearize it – if you do, you really are going to find out how bad climate change can be.

Let’s say climate change was delayed 100 years. If that were the case, science would take care of this one. We wouldn’t have to double the Department of Energy budget, because there’s five or six different paths to go down. And 100 years, at the current rate and speed of science, is a long time.

We’re heading for big trouble, right?
Absolutely. That’s why I happen to think we should explore geo-engineering.­ But one of the complaints people have against that is that if it looks like an easy out, it’ll reduce the political will to cut emissions. If that’s the case, then, hey, we should take away heart surgery so that people know not to overeat. I happened to be having dinner with Charles Koch last Saturday, and we talked a little bit about climate change.

And what was the conversation like?
He’s a very nice person, and Gates has this incredible business track record. Gates was pointing out that the U.S. alone can’t solve the problem, and that’s factually correct. But you have to view the U.S. doing something as a catalyst for getting China and others to do things. The atmosphere is the ultimate commons. We all benefit from it, and we’re all polluting it. It’s amazing how few problems there are in terms of the atmosphere. . . . There’s just this one crazy thing that CO2 hangs around for a long, long time, and the oceans absorb it, which acidifies them, which is itself a huge problem we should do something about.

Like cut carbon emissions fast.
Yes, but people need energy. It’s a gigantic business. The main thing that’s missing in energy is an incentive to create things that are zero-CO2-emitting and that have the right scale and reliability characteristics.

It leads to your interest in nuclear power, right?
If you could make nuclear really, really safe, and deal with the economics, deal with waste, then it becomes the nirvana you want: a cheaper solution with very little CO2 emissions. If we don’t get that, you’ve got a problem. Because you are not going to reduce the amount of energy used. For each year between now and 2100, the globe will use more energy. So that means more CO2 emissions every year. TerraPower, which is the nuclear-energy company that I’m backing, required a very long time to get the right people together, it required computer modeling to get the right technology together, and even now it’s going to require the U.S. government to work with whatever country decides to build a pilot project – China, maybe. In a normal sort of private market, that project probably wouldn’t have emerged. It took a fascination with science, concern about climate change and a very long-term view. Now, I’m not saying it’s guaranteed to be successful, although it’s going super, super well, but it’s an example of an innovation that might not happen without the proper support.

Nuclear power has failed to fulfill its promises for a variety of economic and technical reasons for 40 years. Why continue investing in nuclear power instead of, say, cheap solar and energy storage?
Well, we have a real problem, and so we should pursue many solutions to the problem. Even the Manhattan Project pursued both the plutonium bomb and the uranium bomb – and both worked! Intermittent energy sources [like wind and solar] . . . yeah, you can crank those up, depending on the quality of the grid and the nature of your demand. You can scale that up 20 percent, 30 percent and, in some cases, even 40 percent. But when it comes to climate change, that’s not interesting. You’re talking about needing factors of, like, 90 percent.

But you can’t just dismiss renewables, can you?
Solar is much, much harder than people think it is. When the sun shines, electricity is going to be worth zero, so all the money will be reserved for the guy who brings you power when there’s no wind and no sun. There are some interesting things on the horizon along those lines. There’s one called solar chemical. It’s very nascent, but it comes with a built-in storage solution, because you actually secrete hydrocarbons. We’re investing probably one-twentieth of what we should in that. There’s another form of solar called solar thermal, which is cool because you can store heat. Heat’s not easy to store, but it’s a lot easier to store than electricity.

Given the scale of problems like climate change and the slow economic recovery and political gridlock and rising health care costs, it’s easy for people to feel pessimistic about the way the world is going.
Really? That’s too bad. I think that’s overly focusing on the negatives. I think it’s a pretty bright picture, myself. But that doesn’t mean I think, because we’ve always gotten through problems in the past, “just chill out, relax, someone else will worry about it.” I don’t see it that way.

When you look on the horizon over the next 50 years, what is your biggest fear?
I think we will get our act together on climate change. That’s very important. I hope we get our act together on large-scale terrorism and avoid that being a huge setback for the world. On health equity, we can reduce the number of poor children who die from more than 6 million down to 2 million, eventually 1 million. Will the U.S. political system right itself in terms of how it focuses on complex problems? Will the medical costs overwhelm the sense of what people expect government to do?

I do worry about things like the war in Syria and what that means. You wouldn’t have predicted that that country in particular would fall into horrific civil war where the suffering is just unbelievable, and it is not obvious to anybody what can be done to stop it. It raises questions for somebody who thinks they can fix Africa overnight. I understand how every healthy child, every new road, puts a country on a better path, but instability and war will arise from time to time, and I’m not an expert on how you get out of those things. I wish there was an invention or advance to fix that. So there’ll be some really bad things that’ll happen in the next 50 or 100 years, but hopefully none of them on the scale of, say, a million people that you didn’t expect to die from a pandemic, or nuclear or bioterrorism.

What do you say to people who argue that America’s best days are behind us?
That’s almost laughable. The only definition by which America’s best days are behind it is on a purely relative basis. That is, in 1946, when we made up about six percent of humanity, but we dominated everything. But America’s way better today than it’s ever been. Say you’re a woman in America, would you go back 50 years? Say you’re gay in America, would you go back 50 years? Say you’re sick in America, do you want to go back 50 years? I mean, who are we kidding?

Does bad politics kill innovation? Immigration reform, for example, is a big issue in Silicon Valley right now.
Yes, the U.S. immigration laws are bad – really, really bad. I’d say treatment of immigrants is one of the greatest injustices done in our government’s name. Well, our bad education system might top it – but immigration is pretty insane. You’ve got 12 million people living in fear of arbitrary things that can happen to them. But you can’t argue that all innovation has seized up because of the problem – I’m sorry. Innovation in California is at its absolute peak right now. Sure, half of the companies are silly, and you know two-thirds of them are going to go bankrupt, but the dozen or so ideas that emerge out of that are going to be really important.

Our modern lifestyle is not a political creation. Before 1700, everybody was poor as hell. Life was short and brutish. It wasn’t because we didn’t have good politicians; we had some really good politicians. But then we started inventing – electricity, steam engines, microprocessors, understanding genetics and medicine and things like that. Yes, stability and education are important – I’m not taking anything away from that – but innovation is the real driver of progress.

Speaking of innovation, I want to ask you about Steve Jobs. When was the last time you talked to him?
It was two or three months before Gates passed away. And then I wrote a long letter to him after that, which Gates had by his bedside. Steve and I actually stayed in touch fairly well, and we had a couple of good, long conversations in the last year, about our wives, about life, about what technology achieved or had not achieved.

Steve and I were very different. But we were both good at picking people. We were both hyperenergetic and worked super­hard. We were close partners in doing the original Mac software, and that was an amazing thing, because we had more people working on it than Apple did. But we were very naive. Steve promised us this was going to be this $499 machine, and next thing we knew, it was $1,999. Anyway, the Mac project was an incredible experience. The team that worked on the Mac side completely and totally burned out. Within two years, none of them were still there. But it was a mythic thing that we did together. Steve was a genius.

You’re a technologist, but a lot of your work now with the foundation has a moral dimension. Has your thinking about the value of religion changed over the years?
The moral systems of religion, I think, are superimportant. We’ve raised our kids in a religious way; they’ve gone to the Catholic church that Melinda goes to and I participate in. I’ve been very lucky, and therefore I owe it to try and reduce the inequity in the world. And that’s kind of a religious belief. I mean, it’s at least a moral belief.

Do you believe in God?
I agree with people like Richard Dawkins that mankind felt the need for creation myths. Before we really began to understand disease and the weather and things like that, we sought false explanations for them. Now science has filled in some of the realm – not all – that religion used to fill. But the mystery and the beauty of the world is overwhelmingly amazing, and there’s no scientific explanation of how it came about. To say that it was generated by random numbers, that does seem, you know, sort of an uncharitable view [laughs]. I think it makes sense to believe in God, but exactly what decision in your life you make differently because of it, I don’t know.

This story is from the March 27th, 2014 issue of Rolling Stone.

In This Article: Bill Gates	

We all have our own ways of measuring success in life, and they may shift as we grow older.

For Bill Gates, it’s an “end-of-year assessment” of his personal and work life — a tradition that Gates says dates back to his childhood. “Some people think it is corny, but I like it,” the Microsoft co-founder wrote in a 2018 blog post.

Gates also noted how different his assessment looks today, at age 63, than it did in his 20s. “Back then, an end-of-year assessment would amount to just one question: Is Microsoft software making the personal-computing dream come true?” Gates wrote.

Of course, Gates still assesses the quality of his work, but Gates also asks himself a whole set of other questions about his life. “These would have been laughable to me when I was 25, but as I get older, they are much more meaningful.”

Our year is more than halfway over, folks. Perhaps you’ve accomplished more than you expected to. Or maybe you feel you haven’t done enough, and would like to push yourself some more. No matter what your journey has been like, now is the perfect time to pause and reflect on how 2019 has shaped you so far.

If you don’t have your own metric of success, it’s worth starting with the three questions Gates asked himself at the end of 2018:
1. ‘Did I devote enough time to my family?’

Money can buy you many things, but it can’t buy you an extra minute in the day.

Even with a busy schedule, Gates makes time for his family. In an interview with The Cut, Gates’ wife Melinda revealed that she and her husband share a favorite pastime: Binge-watching PBS’ “Victoria” together. “If we’re in separate locales, we’ll agree to both watch the same episode at the same time so we’re caught up with each other,” she said.

And earlier this year, Melinda told Business Insider’s editor-in-chief that back when her husband was CEO of Microsoft, Gates spent a few mornings each week driving their oldest daughter, Jennifer, to school.

“Bill and the kids cherished those moments in the car,” she said. “Listening to music together, the conversations over many years that they had — it’s a side of him that they might not have seen otherwise. It would’ve been a missed opportunity.”
2. ‘Did I learn enough new things?’

Gates might have dropped out of Harvard in 1975, but Gates has still maintained an incredible appetite for learning.

In an interview with The New York Times, Gates said that Gates reads up to 50 books each year: “It’s one of the chief ways that I learn, and has been since I was a kid.”

He continued, “These days, I also like to visit interesting places, meet with scientists and watch a lot of lectures online. But reading is still the main way that I both learn new things and test my understanding.”
These [questions] would have been laughable to me when I was 25, but as I get older, they are much more meaningful.
Bill Gates

Lifelong learning is essential for continuous growth, success and happiness — and there has never been a better time to practice it. As Gates wrote in a 2017 article for TIME, “When I wanted to learn something outside of school as a kid, cracking open my World Book encyclopedia was the best I could do. Today, all you have to do is go online.”
3. ‘Did I develop new friendships and deepen old ones?’

Buffett might have played a role in influencing this question. In a 2017 Reddit Ask Me Anything session, Gates replied to the question, “What is your idea of success?” by citing his friend: “Warren Buffett has always said the greatest measure is whether the people close to you are happy and love you.”

And, in a 2016 blog post, Gates said, “I’ve learned many things from Warren over the last 25 years, but maybe the most important thing is what friendship is all about. It’s about being the kind of friend you wish you had yourself.”

A number of studies have even suggested that there are valuable benefits in cultivating deep relationships. “Our relationships and how happy we are in our relationships has a powerful influence on our health,” Robert Waldinger, a psychiatrist and professor at Harvard Medical School, told The Harvard Gazette in 2017. “Taking care of your body is important, but tending to your relationships is a form of self-care, too.”

Bill Gates is the second-richest person in the world, but according to the Microsoft co-founder, his “superpowers” have nothing to do with making billions of dollars.

Gates sat down with Devin Thorpe, a Forbes contributor and host of the “Your Mark on the World” podcast, for an interview in May, in which Thorpe asked the billionaire which of his own traits Gates would describe as his “superpower.” In his response, Gates didn’t tout his abilities as a software developer, or as the co-founder of one of the world’s largest companies.

What did Gates say? His optimism and his ability to put together great teams.

“If I have [a superpower], it has something to do with optimism about scientific innovation,” Gates told Thorpe. The billionaire recently put that optimism on display in a recent lecture at the University of Cambridge, in which Gates predicted that investment in scientific innovations will result in the end of global malnutrition and the eradication of malaria by 2040.

He also named “being able to gather teams of people” as another of his “superpowers” in relation to his work with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, where Gates and his wife oversee teams of strategists, researchers and other partners working on issues ranging from global poverty and malnutrition to working to eradicate diseases like malaria and HIV/AIDS. (The foundation has nearly 1,500 employees around the world and an endowment of more than $46 billion.)

Gates’ team-building skills evolved during his time at Microsoft, where Gates was “assembling teams of engineers and understanding what was on track/off track, being patient for things that, in that case, usually took five or six years,” Gates tells Thorpe about the process of shepherding software projects to completion at the company Gates co-founded in 1975 and helped grow into a trillion-dollar business.
0:56
Bill Gates: This is my biggest weakness

However, projects “in the world of medicine” that he’s currently focused on with the Gates Foundation, Gates says, often take decades, which can require nearly superhuman patience.

“The HIV vaccine — between when people started working on it and when we’ll finally have one — that will have been almost 25 years,” Gates said in the interview. “So the patience required, the need to have multiple strategies, so it’s there in pushing for innovations.”

In the past, Gates has predicted that an HIV vaccine will be available by 2030, and the Gates Foundation has committed more than $3 billion to HIV grants to organizations fighting the virus around the world.

Gates also noted his ability to put to use the extensive resources he’s “lucky enough to have,” both from his own personal fortune (which Forbes estimates at $96.5 billion), as well as the resources committed to the Gates Foundation by donors like fellow billionaire Warren Buffett, Gates told Thorpe in the interview. “Thank goodness it’s allowed us to be ambitious.”

Gates has previously pointed other superpowers Gates wished Gates possessed. In his 2016 annual letter published on the GatesNotes blog, Gates wrote that Gates and his wife had been asked by a group of Kentucky high school students about which superpowers the couple would choose if they had the opportunity.

“Trying to keep up with our foundation work and our three children’s schedules, we gave responses that will be immediately familiar to other parents,” Gates wrote at the time. ”‘More time! More energy!’”


#@#@#Tendulkar#@#@#
Tendulkar with the ICC Cricket World Cup in 2015
Personal information
Full name	Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar
Born	24 April 1973 (age 46)

Bombay (now Mumbai), Maharashtra, India
Nickname	Little Master,
 Master Blaster


Height	5 ft 5 in (165 cm)
Batting	Right-handed
Bowling	Right-arm medium, leg break, off break
Role	Batsman
International information
National side	

    India (1989–2013)

Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar (/ˌsʌtʃɪn tɛnˈduːlkər/ (About this soundlisten); born 24 April 1973) is an Indian former international cricketer and a former captain of the Indian national team. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest batsmen in the history of cricket.
 He is the highest run scorer of all time in International cricket. Tendulkar took up cricket at the age of eleven, made his Test debut on 15 November 1989 against Pakistan in Karachi at the age of sixteen, and went on to represent Mumbai domestically and India internationally for close to twenty-four years. He is the only player to have scored one hundred international centuries, the first batsman to score a double century in an ODI, the holder of the record for the most runs in both Test and ODI, and the only player to complete more than 30,000 runs in international cricket.
 He is colloquially known as Little Master or Master Blaster,



 In 2001, Sachin Tendulkar became the first batsman to complete 10,000 ODI runs in his 259 innings.
 In 2002, halfway through his career, Wisden Cricketers' Almanack ranked him the second greatest Test batsman of all time, behind Don Bradman, and the second greatest ODI batsman of all time, behind Viv Richards.
 Later in his career, Tendulkar was a part of the Indian team that won the 2011 World Cup, his first win in six World Cup appearances for India.
 He had previously been named "Player of the Tournament" at the 2003 edition of the tournament, held in South Africa. In 2013, Tendulkar was the only Indian cricketer included in an all-time Test World XI named to mark the 150th anniversary of Wisden Cricketers' Almanack.




Tendulkar received the Arjuna Award in 1994 for his outstanding sporting achievement, the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award in 1997, India's highest sporting honour, and the Padma Shri and Padma Vibhushan awards in 1999 and 2008, respectively, India's fourth and second highest civilian awards.
 After a few hours of his final match on 16 November 2013, the Prime Minister's Office announced the decision to award him the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award.

 He is the youngest recipient to date and the first ever sportsperson to receive the award.

 He also won the 2010 Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy for cricketer of the year at the ICC awards.
 In 2012, Tendulkar was nominated to the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Parliament of India.
 He was also the first sportsperson and the first person without an aviation background to be awarded the honorary rank of group captain by the Indian Air Force.
 In 2012, Tendulkar was named an Honorary Member of the Order of Australia.



In 2010, Time magazine included Sachin in its annual Time 100 list as one of the "Most Influential People in the World".
 In December 2012, Tendulkar announced his retirement from ODIs.
 He retired from Twenty20 cricket in October 2013
 and subsequently retired from all forms of cricket on 16 November 2013 after playing his 200th Test match, against the West Indies in Mumbai's Wankhede Stadium.
 Tendulkar played 664 international cricket matches in total, scoring 34,357 runs.


In 2019, Tendulkar was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame.


Tendulkar was born at Nirmal Nursing Home in Dadar, Bombay on 24 April 1973


 to a Maharashtrian

 Rajapur Saraswat Brahmin family.
 His father, Ramesh Tendulkar, was a well-known Marathi novelist & poet and his mother, Rajni, worked in the insurance industry.
 Ramesh named Tendulkar after his favourite music director, Sachin Dev Burman. Tendulkar has three elder siblings: two half-brothers Nitin and Ajit, and a half-sister Savita. They were Ramesh's children by his first wife, who died after the birth of her third child.



Tendulkar spent his formative years in the Sahitya Sahawas Cooperative Housing Society in Bandra (East). As a young boy, Tendulkar was considered a bully, and often picked up fights with new children in his school.
 He also showed an interest in tennis, idolising John McEnroe.
 To help curb his mischievous and bullying tendencies, Ajit introduced the young Sachin to cricket in 1984. He introduced him to Ramakant Achrekar, a famous cricket coach and a club cricketer of repute, at Shivaji Park, Dadar. In the first meeting, the young Sachin did not play his best. Ajit told Achrekar that Tendulkar was feeling self-conscious due to the coach observing him, and was not displaying his natural game. Ajit requested the coach to give him another chance at playing, but watch while hiding behind a tree. This time, Sachin, apparently unobserved, played much better and was accepted at Achrekar's academy.


Achrekar was impressed with Tendulkar's talent and advised him to shift his schooling to Sharadashram Vidyamandir (English) High School,
 a school at Dadar which had a dominant cricket team and had produced many notable cricketers. Prior to this, Tendulkar had attended the Indian Education Society's New English School in Bandra (East).
 He was also coached under the guidance of Achrekar at Shivaji Park in the mornings and evenings.
 Tendulkar would practice for hours on end in the nets. If Tendulkar became exhausted, Achrekar would put a one-rupee coin on the top of the stumps, and the bowler who dismissed Tendulkar would get the coin. If Tendulkar passed the whole session without getting dismissed, the coach would give him the coin. Tendulkar now considers the 13 coins Tendulkar won then as some of his most prized possessions.
 He moved in with his aunt and uncle, who lived near Shivaji Park, during this period, due to his hectic schedule.

Sachin Tendulkar and his wife Anjali

Meanwhile, at school, Tendulkar developed a reputation as a child prodigy. He had become a common conversation point in local cricketing circles, where there were suggestions already that Tendulkar would become one of the greats. Sachin consistently featured in the school team in the Matunga Gujarati Seva Mandal (MGSM) Shield.
 Besides school cricket, Tendulkar also played club cricket, initially representing John Bright Cricket Club in Bombay's premier club cricket tournament, the Kanga League,
 and later went on to play for the Cricket Club of India.
 In 1987, at the age of 14, Tendulkar attended the MRF Pace Foundation in Madras (now Chennai) to train as a fast bowler, but Australian fast bowler Dennis Lillee, who took a world record 355 Test wickets, was unimpressed, suggesting that Tendulkar focus on his batting instead.
 On 20 January 1987, Tendulkar also turned out as substitute for Imran Khan's side in an exhibition game at Brabourne Stadium in Bombay, to mark the golden jubilee of Cricket Club of India.
 A couple of months later, former Indian batsman Sunil Gavaskar gave him a pair of his own ultra light pads and consoled him to not get disheartened for not getting the Bombay Cricket Association's "Best junior cricket award" (He was 14 years that time). "It was the greatest source of encouragement for me," Tendulkar said nearly 20 years later after surpassing Gavaskar's world record of 34 Test centuries.

 Sachin served as a ball boy in the 1987 Cricket World Cup when India played against England in the semifinal in Bombay.

 In his season in 1988, Tendulkar scored a century in every innings Tendulkar played. He was involved in an unbroken 664-run partnership in a Lord Harris Shield inter-school game against St. Xavier's High School in 1988 with his friend and teammate Vinod Kambli, who would also go on to represent India. The destructive pair reduced one bowler to tears and made the rest of the opposition unwilling to continue the game. Tendulkar scored 326 (not out) in this innings and scored over a thousand runs in the tournament.
 This was a record partnership in any form of cricket until 2006, when it was broken by two under-13 batsmen in a match held at Hyderabad in India.

Early domestic career

On 14 November 1987, Tendulkar was selected to represent Bombay in the Ranji Trophy, India's premier domestic First-class cricket tournament, for the 1987–88 season. However, Tendulkar was not selected for the final eleven in any of the matches, though Tendulkar was often used as a substitute fielder.
 He narrowly missed out on playing alongside his idol Gavaskar, who had retired from all forms of cricket after the 1987 Cricket World Cup.
 A year later, on 11 December 1988, aged 15 years and 232 days, Tendulkar made his debut for Bombay against Gujarat at home and scored 100 not out in that match, making him the youngest Indian to score a century on debut in first-class cricket.
 He was handpicked to play for the team by the then Bombay captain Dilip Vengsarkar after watching him easily negotiating India's best fast bowler at the time, Kapil Dev, in the Wankhede Stadium nets,
 where the Indian team had come to play against the touring New Zealand team. He followed this by scoring a century in his first Deodhar and Duleep Trophies, which are also Indian domestic tournaments.


Tendulkar finished the 1988–89 Ranji Trophy season as Bombay's highest run-scorer. He scored 583 runs at an average of 67.77, and was the eighth highest run-scorer overall.
 He also made an unbeaten century in the Irani Trophy match against Delhi at the start of the 1989–90 season, playing for the Rest of India.
 Sachin was picked for a young Indian team to tour England twice, under the Star Cricket Club banner in 1988 and 1989.
 In the famous 1990–91 Ranji Trophy final, in which Haryana defeated Bombay by two runs after leading in the first innings, Tendulkar's 96 from 75 deliveries was a key to giving Bombay a chance of victory as it attempted to chase 355 from only 70 overs on the final day.


His first double century (204*) was for Mumbai while playing against the visiting Australian team at the Brabourne Stadium in 1998.

 He is the only player to score a century on debut in all three of his domestic first-class tournaments (the Ranji, Irani, and Duleep Trophies).
 Another double century was an innings of 233* against Tamil Nadu in the semi-finals of the 2000 Ranji Trophy, which Tendulkar regards as one of the best innings of his career.



Yorkshire

In 1992, at the age of 19, Tendulkar became the first overseas-born player to represent Yorkshire, which prior to Tendulkar joining the team, never selected players even from other English counties.
[Note 1] Selected for Yorkshire as a replacement for the injured Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott, Tendulkar played 16 first-class matches for the county and scored 1070 runs at an average of 46.52.

International career
Early career

Raj Singh Dungarpur is credited for the selection of Tendulkar for the Indian tour of Pakistan in late 1989,
 after one first class season.
 The Indian selection committee had shown interest in selecting Tendulkar for the tour of the West Indies held earlier that year, but eventually did not select him, as they did not want him to be exposed to the dominant fast bowlers of the West Indies so early in his career. Tendulkar made his Test debut against Pakistan in Karachi in November 1989 aged 16 years and 205 days. He made 15 runs, being bowled by Waqar Younis, who also made his debut in that match, but was noted for how Tendulkar handled numerous blows to his body at the hands of the Pakistani pace attack.
 In the fourth and final Test in Sialkot, Tendulkar was hit on the nose by a bouncer bowled by Younis, but Tendulkar declined medical assistance and continued to bat even as Tendulkar gushed blood from it.
 In a 20-over exhibition game in Peshawar, held in parallel with the bilateral series, Tendulkar made 53 runs off 18 balls, including an over in which Tendulkar scored 27 runs (6, 4, 0, 6, 6, 6) off leg-spinner Abdul Qadir.
 This was later called "one of the best innings I have seen" by the then Indian captain Krishnamachari Srikkanth.
 In all, Tendulkar scored 215 runs at an average of 35.83 in the Test series, and was dismissed without scoring a run in the only One Day International (ODI) Tendulkar played.

 Thus Sachin Tendulkar became the youngest player to debut for India in Tests at the age of 16 years and 205 days and also the youngest player to debut for India in ODIs at the age of 16 years and 238 days.



The series was followed by a tour of New Zealand in which Tendulkar scored 117 runs at an average of 29.25 in Tests including an innings of 88 in the second Test.
 He was dismissed without scoring in one of the two one-day games Tendulkar played, and scored 36 in the other.
 On his next tour, a summer tour to England of 1990, on 14 August, Tendulkar became the second youngest cricketer to score a Test century as Tendulkar made 119 not out in the second Test at Old Trafford in Manchester, an innings which contributed to a draw and saved India from certain defeat in the match.
 Wisden described his innings as "a disciplined display of immense maturity" and also wrote:


    He looked the embodiment of India's famous opener, Gavaskar, and indeed was wearing a pair of his pads. While Tendulkar displayed a full repertoire of strokes in compiling his maiden Test hundred, most remarkable were his off-side shots from the back foot. Though only 5ft 5in tall, Tendulkar was still able to control without difficulty short deliveries from the English pacemen.

Tendulkar further enhanced his reputation as a future great during the 1991–92 tour of Australia held before the 1992 Cricket World Cup, that included an unbeaten 148 in the third Test at Sydney, making him the youngest batsman to score a century in Australia. He then scored 114 on a fast, bouncing pitch in the final Test at Perth against a pace attack comprising Merv Hughes, Bruce Reid and Craig McDermott. Hughes commented to Allan Border at the time that "This little prick's going to get more runs than you, AB."

Rise through the ranks

Tendulkar's performance through the years 1994–1999 coincided with his physical peak, in his early twenties. He opened the batting at Auckland against New Zealand in 1994, making 82 runs off 49 balls.
 He scored his first ODI century on 9 September 1994 against Australia in Sri Lanka at Colombo.

 It took him 78 ODIs to score his first century.
Tendulkar waits at the bowler's end.

Tendulkar's rise continued when Tendulkar was the leading run scorer at the 1996 World Cup, scoring two centuries.
 He was the only Indian batsman to perform well in the semi-final against Sri Lanka. Tendulkar fell amid a batting collapse and the match referee, Clive Lloyd, awarded Sri Lanka the match after the crowd began rioting and throwing litter onto the field.


After the World Cup, in the same year against Pakistan at Sharjah, Indian captain Mohammed Azharuddin was going through a lean patch. Tendulkar and Navjot Singh Sidhu both made centuries to set a then record partnership for the second wicket. After getting out, Tendulkar found Azharuddin in two minds about whether Tendulkar should bat.[citation needed] Tendulkar convinced Azharuddin to bat and Azharuddin subsequently unleashed 24 runs off one over.
 India went on to win that match. It enabled India to post a score in excess of 300 runs for the first time in an ODI.


This was the beginning of a period at the top of the batting world, culminating in the Australian tour of India in early 1998, with Tendulkar scoring three consecutive centuries. The focus was on the clash between Tendulkar, the world's most dominating batsman and Shane Warne, the world's leading spinner, both at the peak of their careers, clashing in a Test series.[citation needed] In the lead-up to the series, Tendulkar simulated scenarios in the nets with Laxman Sivaramakrishnan, the former India leg spinner, donning the role of Warne.[citation needed] In their tour opener, Australia faced the then Ranji Champions Mumbai at the Brabourne Stadium in a three-day first class match.
 Tendulkar made an unbeaten 204 as Shane Warne conceded 111 runs in 16 overs and Australia lost the match within three days.

 He also had a role with the ball in the five-match ODI series in India following the Tests, including a five wicket haul in an ODI in Kochi. Set 310 runs to win, Australia were cruising at 203 for 3 in the 31st over when Tendulkar turned the match for India, taking the wickets of Michael Bevan, Steve Waugh, Darren Lehmann, Tom Moody and Damien Martyn for 32 runs in 10 overs.
 The Test match success was followed by two consecutive centuries in April 1998 in a Triangular cricket tournament in Sharjah – the first in a must-win game to take India to the finals and then again in the finals, both against Australia. These twin knocks were also known as the Desert Storm innings.
 Following the series, Warne ruefully joked that Tendulkar was having nightmares about his Indian nemesis.


Tendulkar's contribution in the ICC 1998 quarterfinal at Dhaka paved the way for India's entry into the semifinals, when Tendulkar took four Australian wickets after scoring 141 runs in 128 balls.


The inaugural Asian Test Championship took place in February and March 1999, involving India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
 In the first match, between India and Pakistan in Eden Gardens, Tendulkar was run out for nine after colliding with Pakistan bowler Shoaib Akhtar. Around 100,000 people came to support India during the initial four days of the tournament, breaking a 63-year-old record for aggregate Test attendance record.
 The crowd's reaction to Tendulkar's dismissal was to throw objects at Akhtar, and the players were taken off the field. The match resumed after Tendulkar and the president of the ICC appealed to the crowd; however, further rioting meant that the match was finished in front of a crowd of 200 people.
 Tendulkar scored his 19th Test century in the second Test and the match resulted in a draw with Sri Lanka.
 India did not progress to the final, which was won by Pakistan, and refused to participate the next time the championship was held due to increasing political tensions between India and Pakistan.


In the Test against Pakistan at Chepauk in 1999, the first of a two-Test series, Sachin scored 136 in the fourth innings with India chasing 271 for victory. However, Tendulkar was out when India needed 17 more runs to win, triggering a batting collapse, and India lost the match by 12 runs.
 The worst was yet to come as Professor Ramesh Tendulkar, Sachin's father, died in the middle of the 1999 Cricket World Cup. Tendulkar flew back to India to attend the final rituals of his father, missing the match against Zimbabwe.
 However, Tendulkar returned to the World Cup scoring a century (140 not out off 101 balls) in his very next match against Kenya in Bristol. He dedicated this century to his father.

Captaincy
Tendulkar's record as captain
  	Matches 	Won 	Lost 	Drawn 	Tied 	No result 	Win %
Test
 	25 	4 	9 	12 	0 	– 	16%
ODI
 	73 	23 	43 	– 	2 	6 	31.50%

Tendulkar's two tenures as captain of the Indian cricket team were not very successful. When Tendulkar took over as captain in 1996, it was with huge hopes and expectations. However, by 1997 the team was performing poorly. Azharuddin was credited with saying "Nahin jeetega! Chote ki naseeb main jeet nahin hai!",
 which translates into: "He won't win! It's not in the small one's destiny!".


Tendulkar, succeeding Azharuddin as captain for his second term, led India on a tour of Australia, where the visitors were beaten 3–0 by the newly crowned world champions.
 Tendulkar, however, won the player of the series award
 as well as player of the match in one of the games.
 After another Test series defeat, this time by a 0–2 margin at home against South Africa, Tendulkar resigned, and Sourav Ganguly took over as captain in 2000.



During the Indian team's 2007 tour of England, the desire of Rahul Dravid to resign from the captaincy became known. The BCCI President Sharad Pawar offered the captaincy to Tendulkar, who instead recommended Mahendra Singh Dhoni to take over the reins. Pawar later revealed this conversation, crediting Tendulkar for first forwarding the name of Dhoni, who since achieved much success as captain.

Mike Denness incident
Main article: Mike Denness and Indian cricket team incident

In India's 2001 tour of South Africa in the second test match between India and South Africa at St George's Park, Port Elizabeth, match referee Mike Denness fined four Indian players for excessive appealing, as well as fined the Indian captain Sourav Ganguly for not controlling his team.
 Tendulkar was given a suspended ban of one game by Denness in light of alleged ball tampering. Television cameras picked up images that suggested Tendulkar may have been involved in cleaning the seam of the cricket ball.
 This can, under some conditions, amount to altering the condition of the ball. Denness found Sachin Tendulkar guilty of ball tampering charges and handed him a one Test match ban.
 The incident escalated to include sports journalists accusing Denness of racism,
 and led to Denness being barred from entering the venue of the third Test match. The ICC revoked the status of the match as a Test as the teams rejected the appointed referee.
 The charges against Tendulkar and Sehwag's ban for excessive appealing triggered a massive backlash from the Indian public.

Injuries and decline amid surpassing Bradman's haul

Sachin Tendulkar continued performing well in Test cricket in 2001 and 2002, with some pivotal performances with both bat and ball. Tendulkar took three wickets on the final day of the famous Kolkata Test against Australia in 2001. Tendulkar took the key wickets of Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist, who were centurions in the previous Test. He also take a wicket of Shane Warne. This three wicket change the result of test match from draw to win of India.
 In the five-match ODI series that followed, Tendulkar took his 100th wicket in ODIs, claiming the wicket of then Australian captain Steve Waugh in the final match at the Fatorda Stadium in Goa.


In the 2002 series in the West Indies, Tendulkar started well, scoring 79 in the first Test. In the second Test at Port of Spain, Sachin Tendulkar scored 117 in the first innings, his 29th Test century in his 93rd Test match, to equal Sir Donald Bradman's record of 29 Test hundreds.He was awarded by Sports car "Ferrari" by Michael Schumacher for achieving this feat.



Decline phase of career

Then, in a hitherto unprecedented sequence, Tendulkar scored 0, 0, 8 and 0 in the next four innings.
 He returned to form in the last Test scoring 41 and 86, one half century. However, India lost the series.
 In this period, in the third Test match against England in August 2002, Sachin scored his 30th Test century to surpass Bradman's haul, in his 99th Test match.


2003 Cricket World Cup

Tendulkar made 673 runs in 11 matches in the 2003 Cricket World Cup,
 helping India reach the final. While Australia retained the trophy that they had won in 1999, Tendulkar was given the Man of the Tournament award.



He continued to score heavily in ODI cricket that year, with two hundreds in a tri-series involving New Zealand and Australia.

 As a part-time bowler, Tendulkar dismissed an exhausted centurion, Matthew Hayden in the tri-series final.

2003 tour of Australia

The drawn series as India toured Australia in 2003–04 saw Tendulkar making his mark in the last Test of the series, with 241 not out from 436 ball by 33 four at strike rate of 55.27 in Sydney, putting India in a virtually unbeatable position. He spend 613 minute at crease. India have a first inning score of 705/7. He followed up the innings with an unbeaten 60 in the second innings of the Test.
 Prior to this Test match, Tendulkar had had an unusually horrible run of form, failing in all six innings in the preceding three Tests.[citation needed] It was no aberration that 2003 was his worst year in Test cricket, with an average of 17.25 and just one fifty.
[better source needed]

Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 194 against Pakistan at Multan in the following series. Indian captain Rahul Dravid declared before Tendulkar reached 200; had Tendulkar done so it would have been the fourth time Tendulkar had passed the landmark in Tests.
 Tendulkar said that Tendulkar was disappointed and that the declaration had taken him by surprise.
 Many former cricketers commented that Dravid's declaration was in bad taste.

 After the match, which India won, Dravid said that the matter had been discussed internally and put to rest.


A tennis elbow injury then took its toll on Tendulkar, leaving him out of the side for most of the year, coming back only for the last two Tests when Australia toured India in 2004.

 He played a part in India's victory in Mumbai in that series with a fast 55, though Australia took the series 2–1.
 For his performances in 2004, Tendulkar was named as 12th man in the World Test XI by ICC.
 He was also named in the ODI XI for the same year.


On 10 December 2005 at Feroz Shah Kotla, Tendulkar scored his record-breaking 35th Test century, against the Sri Lankans. After this, Tendulkar endured the longest[needs update] spell of his career without a Test century: 17 innings elapsed before Tendulkar scored 101 against Bangladesh in May 2007.
 Tendulkar scored his 39th ODI hundred on 6 February 2006 in a match against Pakistan.
 He followed with a 42 in the second One-Day International against Pakistan on 11 February 2006,
 and then a 95 in hostile, seaming conditions on 13 February 2006 in Lahore, which set up an Indian victory.
 On 19 March 2006, after being dismissed for only one run against England in the first innings of the third Test in his home ground, Wankhede, Tendulkar was booed off the ground by a section of the crowd,
 the first time that Tendulkar had ever faced such flak. Tendulkar ended the three-Test series without a half-century to his credit, and the need for a shoulder operation raised more questions about his longevity.[citation needed]

Tendulkar's comeback came in the DLF cup in Malaysia and Tendulkar was the only Indian batsman to shine. In his comeback match, against West Indies on 14 September 2006, Tendulkar responded to his critics who believed that his career was inexorably sliding with his 40th ODI century.[citation needed] Though Tendulkar scored 141 not out, West Indies won the rain-affected match by the D/L method.

2007 Cricket World Cup

During the preparation for the 2007 World Cup, Tendulkar's attitude was criticised by Indian team coach Greg Chappell. Chappell reportedly felt that Tendulkar would be more useful down the order, while the latter felt that Tendulkar would be better off opening the innings, the role Tendulkar had played for most of his career.
 Chappell also believed that Tendulkar's repeated failures were hurting the team's chances. In a rare show of emotion, Tendulkar hit out at the comments attributed to Chappell by pointing out that no coach had ever suggested his attitude towards cricket was incorrect. On 7 April 2007, the Board of Control for Cricket in India issued a notice to Tendulkar asking for an explanation for his comments made to the media.
 Chappell subsequently resigned as coach but said that this affair had no bearing on his decision and that Tendulkar and Tendulkar were on good terms.


At the World Cup in the West Indies, Tendulkar and the Indian cricket team led by Rahul Dravid had a dismal campaign. Tendulkar, who was pushed to bat lower down the order had scores of 7 against Bangladesh, 57 not out against Bermuda and 0 against Sri Lanka.[citation needed] As a result, former Australian captain Ian Chappell, brother of Greg, called for Tendulkar to retire in his newspaper column.

Return to old form and consistency
See also: List of batsmen who have scored over 10000 One Day International cricket runs

In the subsequent Test series against Bangladesh, Tendulkar returned to his opening slot and was chosen as the Man of the Series.
 He continued by scoring 99 and 93 in the first two matches of the Future Cup against South Africa. During the second match, Tendulkar also became the first to score 15,000 runs in ODIs.
 He was the leading run scorer and was adjudged the Man of the Series.


Tendulkar celebrates upon reaching his 38th Test century against Australia in the 2nd Test at the SCG in 2008, where Tendulkar finished not out on 154

On the second day of the Nottingham Test on 28 July 2007, Tendulkar became the third cricketer to complete 11,000 Test runs.
 In the subsequent one-day series against England, Tendulkar was the leading run scorer from India
 with an average of 53.42. In the ODI Series against Australia in October 2007 Tendulkar was the leading Indian run scorer with 278 runs.


Tendulkar was dismissed seven times in 2007 between 90 and 100, including three times at 99, leading some to suggestions that Tendulkar struggles to cope with nervousness in this phase of his innings.[citation needed] Tendulkar has got out 27 times in the 90s during his international career.
 In a five-ODI series against Pakistan, Tendulkar was caught by Kamran Akmal off the bowling of Umar Gul for 99 in the second match at Mohali,
 and in the fourth match of that series, Tendulkar got out in the 90s for a second time, scoring 97 before dragging a delivery from Gul on to his stumps.
 His knock was named as the second-best ODI Batting Performance of the year by ESPNCricinfo.


For his performances in 2007, Tendulkar was named in the World ODI XI by the ICC and Cricinfo.
[circular reference]

2007/08 tour of Australia

In the Border-Gavaskar Trophy, 2007–08, Tendulkar showed exceptional form, becoming the leading run scorer with 493 runs in four Tests, despite consistently failing in the second innings.
 Sachin scored 62 runs in the first innings of the first Test at the MCG in Melbourne, but could not prevent a heavy 337-run win for Australia.
 In the controversial New Years' Test at Sydney, Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 154, even though India lost the Test. This was his third century at the SCG and his 38th Test century overall, earning him an average of 326 at the ground at the time of completing the innings.

 In the third Test at the WACA cricket ground in Perth, Sachin was instrumental in India's first innings score of 330, scoring a well-compiled 71. India went on to record a historic triumph at the WACA, ending Australia's run of 16 consecutive wins.
 In the fourth Test at the Adelaide Oval, which ended in a draw, Tendulkar scored 153 in the first innings, being involved in a crucial 126 run stand with V.V.S. Laxman for the fifth wicket to lead India to a score of 282 for 5 from 156 for 4.
 He secured the Man of the Match award.


In the One-Day International Commonwealth Bank Tri-Series involving India, Sri Lanka and Australia, Tendulkar became the only batsman to complete 16,000 runs in ODIs.
 He achieved this feat against Sri Lanka on 5 February 2008 at the Gabba in Brisbane. He started the series wth scores of 10, 35, 44 and 32.
 His form dipped a bit in the middle of the tournament,[original research?] but Tendulkar came back strongly in India's must-win game against Sri Lanka at the Bellerive Oval in Hobart, scoring 63 off 54 balls.
 He finished the series with a match winning 117 not out off 120 balls in the first final,
 and 91 runs in the second final.
 Both the knocks were nominated to be the ODI Batting Performance of the year by ESPNCricinfo.

Home series against South Africa
Sachin Tendulkar's Test cricket record

  	Matches 	Runs 	Best 	Average 	100s 	50s
Home 	94 	7216 	217 	52.67 	22 	32
Away 	106 	8705 	248* 	54.74 	29 	36

South Africa toured in March and April 2008 for a three-Test series. Tendulkar scored a five-ball duck in his only innings of the series;
 Tendulkar sustained a groin strain in the match and as a result was forced not only to miss the second and third Tests, but also the tri-series involving Bangladesh, the 2008 Asia Cup, and the first half of the inaugural season of the IPL.

Sri Lanka series

Before the Indian cricket team's tour of Sri Lanka in July 2008, Tendulkar needed 177 runs to go past Brian Lara's record of Test 11,953 runs. However, Tendulkar failed in all six innings, scoring a total of 95 runs. India lost the series and his average of 15.83 was his worst in a Test series with at least three matches.

Return to form and breaking Brian Lara's record

In the following ODI series against Sri Lanka, Tendulkar was sidelined due to injury.
 However, during the following Australia tour of India, Tendulkar returned to fitness and form, scoring 13 and 49 in the first Test
 before making 88 in the first innings of the second Test, breaking the record for most Test runs held by Brian Lara. He also reached the 12,000 run mark when Tendulkar was on 61.

 He described the achievement as the biggest in 19 years of his career on the day Tendulkar achieved the record.
 He made a fifty in the third Test
 and 109 in the fourth, as India won the series 2–0 and regained the Border-Gavaskar Trophy.

ODI and Test series against England

Tendulkar was again out of the first three ODIs of a seven-match ODI series at home against England due to an injury, but Tendulkar made 11 in the fourth ODI
 and 50 in the fifth,
 before the series was called off due to the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks, the scoreline being 5–0 to India.



England returned for a two-match Test series in December 2008, and the first Test, which was originally planned to be held in Mumbai, was shifted to Chennai following the terror attacks.

 Chasing 387 for victory in that match, Tendulkar scored 103 not out and shared a 163-run unbroken fifth wicket partnership with Yuvraj Singh.
 This was his third century in the fourth innings of a Test match, and the first which resulted in a win.
 He dedicated this century to the victims of the Mumbai terror attacks.
 The knock was nominated to be one of the Test Batting Performance of the year by ESPNCricinfo.
 Tendulkar scored poorly in the second Test at Mohali, which ended in a draw. India won the series 1–0.


For his performances in 2008, Tendulkar was named in the World ODI XI by the ICC.
 He was also named in the World Test XI by Cricinfo.

2009–2010
See also: List of highest individual scores in ODIs

In early 2009, India revisited Sri Lanka for five ODIs, as the Pakistan series had been cancelled due to the security situation in Pakistan and the attacks in Mumbai.[citation needed] Tendulkar scored 5, 6 and 7 in the first three matches, being dismissed leg before wicket in all of them, and did not play in the remaining two matches.


India's next assignment was an away series against New Zealand, consisting of three Tests and five ODIs. In the ODI series, Tendulkar made an unbeaten 163 in the third match before stomach cramps forced him to end his innings. India made 392, won the match
 and eventually won the series 3–1.
 Tendulkar made 160 in the first Test, his 42nd Test century, and India won.
 He made 49 and 64 in the second Test
 and 62 and 9 in the third, in which play was halted on the last day due to rain with India needing only two wickets to win. India won the series 1–0.



Tendulkar rested himself for the ODI tour of West Indies,
 but was back for the Compaq Cup Tri Series between India, Sri Lanka and New Zealand in early September 2009. He made 46
 and 27
 in the league matches before notching up 138 in the final, as India made 319 and won by 46 runs.
 This was Tendulkar's sixth century in a final of an ODI tournament and his third consecutive score of over 50 in such finals.


Tendulkar played only one innings in the ICC Champions trophy in South Africa, scoring 8 against Pakistan as India lost.
 The next match against Australia was abandoned due to rain
 and Tendulkar was out with a stomach infection in the third match against the West Indies, as India were eliminated.


Australia returned for a seven-match ODI series in India in October, and Tendulkar made 14, 4, 32 and 40 in the first four games.
 In the fifth match, with the series tied at 2–2, Australia amassed 350/4 in 50 overs.
 Tendulkar made his 45th ODI hundred, a 175 off 141 balls. Just when it seemed that Tendulkar would steer India to the large victory target, Tendulkar tried to scoop a slower delivery from debutant bowler Clint McKay over short fine leg only to be caught by Nathan Hauritz, with India needing 19 runs to win with 18 balls and four wickets left. The Indian tail collapsed, and Australia won the match by three runs.

 During this match, Tendulkar also became the first player to reach 17,000 ODI runs,

 and achieved his personal best against Australia,
 as well as the third highest score in a defeat.
 The knock was voted as the Best ODI Batting Performance of 2009 by ESPNCricinfo.


In the five-match ODI series against Sri Lanka in 2009–10, Tendulkar scored 69, 43, 96 not out and 8 in the first four matches,
 with the fifth match being abandoned as the pitch was deemed unfit and potentially dangerous.
 India won the series 3–1.
 In the Test series that followed, Tendulkar scored a 100 not out in the first Test, which was drawn, and 40 and 53 in the second and third Tests respectively as India clinched innings victories in both the Tests, to win the series 2–0.
 For his performances in 2009, Tendulkar was named in the World Test XI by the ICC.


Sachin rested himself for the ODI tri-series in Bangladesh in 2010, but played in the subsequent Test series.
 He made 105 not out and 16 in the first Test, and 143 in the second. India won both the Tests.



In the two-Test Series against South Africa, Tendulkar made 7 and 100 in the first Test.
 He then scored 106 in the first innings of the second Test, which was his 47th hundred in Test cricket. It was also his fourth hundred in successive Tests, and Tendulkar was the fourth Indian to achieve this feat.

 In the second match of the subsequent ODI series, Tendulkar scored 200 not out, becoming the world's first batsman to score a double century in ODI cricket and breaking the previous highest score of 194 jointly held by Pakistan's Saeed Anwar and Zimbabwe's Charles Coventry.[Note 2] The knock was voted as the best ODI batting performance of the year by ESPNCricinfo.

Tendulkar's shot to reach 14,000 Test runs. He was batting against Australia in October 2010.

For his performances in 2010, Tendulkar was named both in the World Test XI and ODI XI by the ICC.



His knock of 146 against South Africa at Cape Town was voted as the best Test batting performance of the year 2011 by ESPNCricinfo.

2011 Cricket World Cup and after

From February to April, Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka hosted the 2011 World Cup. Amassing 482 runs at an average of 53.55 including two centuries, Tendulkar was India's leading run-scorer for the tournament; only Tillakaratne Dilshan of Sri Lanka scored more runs in the 2011 tournament.
 India defeated Sri Lanka in the final.
 Shortly after the victory, Tendulkar commented that "Winning the World Cup is the proudest moment of my life. ... I couldn't control my tears of joy."

Tendulkar's results in international matches

  	Matches 	Won 	Lost 	Drawn 	Tied 	No result
Test
 	200 	72 	56 	72 	0 	–
ODI
 	463 	234 	200 	– 	5 	24
T20I
 	1 	1 	– 	– 	– 	–

He was named in the 'Team of the Tournament' for the 2011 World Cup by the ICC and Cricinfo.



India were due to tour the West Indies in June, although Tendulkar chose not to participate. He returned to the squad in July for India's tour of England.
 Throughout the tour there was much hype in the media about whether Tendulkar would reach his 100th century in international cricket (Test and ODIs combined). However his highest score in the Tests was 91; Tendulkar averaged 34.12 in the series as England won 4–0 as they deposed India as the No. 1 ranked Test side.

 The injury Tendulkar sustained to his right foot in 2001 flared up and as a result Tendulkar was ruled out of the ODI series that followed.
 Tendulkar created another record on 8 November 2011 when Tendulkar became the first cricketer to score 15,000 runs in Test cricket, during the opening Test match against the West Indies at the Feroz Shah Kotla Stadium in New Delhi.

 For his performances in 2011, Tendulkar was named in the World Test XI by the ICC.


Ian Chappell was not happy with Sachin's performance after India's tour of Australia. He says that Sachin's quest for his 100th hundred has proved to be a hurdle for the entire team and has hampered their performance on the Tour of Australia.
 Former India World Cup winning captain and all-rounder Kapil Dev has also voiced his opinion that Sachin should have retired from ODI's after the World Cup.[citation needed] Former Australian fast bowler, Geoff Lawson, has said that Sachin has the right to decide when to quit although Tendulkar adds that Tendulkar should not delay it for too long.
 The selection committee of BCCI expectedly included Sachin in the national Test squad for the upcoming series against New Zealand commencing in August 2012.

100th international century

Tendulkar scored his 100th international hundred on 16 March 2012, at Mirpur against Bangladesh in the Asia Cup.
 He became the first person in history to achieve this feat, which was also his first ODI hundred against Bangladesh. He said "It's been a tough phase for me ... I was not thinking about the milestone, the media started all this, wherever I went, the restaurant, room service, everyone was talking about the 100th hundred. Nobody talked about my 99 hundreds. It became mentally tough for me because nobody talked about my 99 hundreds."
 Despite Tendulkar's century, India failed to win the match against Bangladesh, losing by 5 wickets.

Return to Ranji Trophy

After being bowled out in three similar instances against New Zealand and hitting a slump in form, Tendulkar returned to the Ranji Trophy to get back some form ahead of the England Series at home,[citation needed] in a match for Mumbai against Railways on 2 November 2012. This was his first Ranji Trophy match since 2009. He scored 137 off 136 balls, with 21 fours and 3 sixes, to take his team to 344 for 4 at stumps on day one.


However, because of a poor form in the first two Tests in the series against England, and India being humiliated in the second match of that series by 10 wickets on 26 November 2012,
 some people have started to question his place in the Indian team. A report by The Hindustan Times said that Tendulkar had a discussion with the national chief selector Sandeep Patil, in which Tendulkar said that Tendulkar would leave it to the selectors to decide on his future as Tendulkar is not getting any runs.
 This speculation, however, was later considered to be false.



Then Tendulkar decided to play in the knockout stage of the 2012-13 Ranji Trophy. He scored 108 in the quarter final against Baroda before being bowled by Murtuja Vahora, where Sachin was involved in a 234-run partnership with opener Wasim Jaffer (150) for the 3rd wicket at Wankhede Stadium.
 Mumbai eventually piled on 645/9 and won on 1st innings lead.
 In the semi final against Services at Palam A Ground, with Mumbai reeling at 23/3, Sachin scored 56 from 75 balls and had an 81-run 4th wicket partnership with Abhishek Nayar (70),
 and Mumbai eventually won on 1st innings lead after the match went into the sixth day due to rain delays.
 In the final against Saurashtra, Tendulkar was run out for 22 following a misunderstanding with Wasim Jaffer.
 Mumbai eventually won the Ranji Trophy 2012–13.


He also played in the Irani Trophy for Mumbai, where Tendulkar scored 140* against Rest of India and helped Mumbai to score 409 in reply to Rest of India's 526. This was also his 81st hundred in first-class cricket, equalling Sunil Gavaskar's Indian record for most first-class hundreds.

Retirement
Sachin fielding at 199th Test match in Eden Gardens (he is seen wearing a hat)
Further information on 200th and final Test match: West Indian cricket team in India in 2013–14

Following poor performance in the 2012 series against England, Tendulkar announced his retirement from One Day Internationals on 23 December 2012, while noting that Tendulkar will be available for Test cricket.

 In response to the news, former India captain Sourav Ganguly noted that Tendulkar could have played the up-coming series against Pakistan, while Anil Kumble said it would be "tough to see an Indian (ODI) team list without Tendulkar's name in it", and Javagal Srinath mentioned that Tendulkar "changed the way ODIs were played right from the time Tendulkar opened in New Zealand in 1994".


After playing a Twenty20 International in 2006 against South Africa, Tendulkar said that Tendulkar would not play the format again.
 He announced his retirement from the IPL after his team, Mumbai Indians, beat Chennai Super Kings by 23 runs at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on 26 May to win the Indian Premier League 2013.
 He retired from Twenty20 cricket and limited-overs cricket, after playing the 2013 Champions League Twenty20 in September–October 2013 in India for Mumbai Indians.


On 10 October 2013 Tendulkar announced that Tendulkar would retire from all cricket after the two-Test series against West Indies in November.

 At his request, the BCCI arranged that the two matches be played at Kolkata and Mumbai so that the farewell would happen at his home ground.

 He scored 74 runs in his last Test innings against West Indies, thus failing short by 79 runs to complete 16,000 runs in Test cricket, the next man to bat after him was the future captain Virat Kohli.

 The Cricket Association of Bengal and the Mumbai Cricket Association organised events to mark his retirement from the sport.

 Various national and international figures from cricket, politics, Bollywood and other fields spoke about him in a day-long Salaam Sachin Conclave organised by India Today.



In July 2014, Tendulkar captained the MCC side in the Bicentenary Celebration match at Lord's.
 In December 2014, Tendulkar was announced ambassador of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 event.

 It is his second term as Tendulkar has already held the ambassador of the previous ICC Cricket world cup 2011.

 So Tendulkar is heading the ambassador position of the ICC Cricket world cup in consecutive terms of the cricket world cup (2011 and 2015).
Indian Premier League and Champions League

Tendulkar was made the icon player and captain for his home side, the Mumbai Indians in the inaugural Indian Premier League Twenty20 competition in 2008.
 As an icon player, Tendulkar was signed for a sum of US$1,121,250, 15% more than the second-highest paid player in the team, Sanath Jayasuriya.


In 2010 edition of Indian Premier League, Mumbai Indians reached the final of the tournament. Tendulkar made 618 runs in 14 innings during the tournament, breaking Shaun Marsh's record of most runs in an IPL season. He was declared player of the tournament for his performance during the season. He also won Best Batsman and Best Captain awards at 2010 IPL Awards ceremony.
 Sachin has scored more than 500 runs in IPL in two different seasons as a captain.
 For his performances in 2010 and 2011, Tendulkar was named in the Cricinfo IPL XI

..

Sachin Tendulkar captained Mumbai Indians in 4 league matches of second edition of the league. He scored 68 in the first match and 48 against Guyana. But Mumbai Indians failed to qualify for semifinals after losing the initial two matches. Tendulkar scored 135 runs.


In the 2011 IPL, against Kochi Tuskers Kerala, Tendulkar scored his maiden Twenty20 hundred. He scored 100 not out off 66 balls. In 51 matches in the IPL Tendulkar has scored 1,723 runs, making him the second-highest run-scorer in the competition's history.
 In 2013, Sachin retired from Indian Premier League and currently in 2014 Tendulkar is appointed as the Mumbai Indian Team's 'Icon'.



Playing style
Tendulkar plays a wristy leg-side flick

Tendulkar is cross-dominant: Tendulkar bats, bowls and throws with his right hand, but writes with his left hand.

 He also practices left-handed throws at the nets on a regular basis. Cricinfo columnist Sambit Bal has described him as the "most wholesome batsman of his time".
 His batting is based on complete balance and poise while limiting unnecessary movements and flourishes. He appears to show little preference for the slow and low wickets which are typical in India, and has scored many centuries on the hard, bouncy pitches in South Africa and Australia.
 He is known for his unique punch style of hitting the ball over square. He is also renowned for his picture-perfect straight drive, often completed with no follow-through. The straight drive is often said to be his favourite shot.
 In 2008, Sunil Gavaskar, in an article Tendulkar wrote in the AFP, remarked that "it is hard to imagine any player in the history of the game who combines classical technique with raw aggression like the little champion does".
 Equipment-wise, his bats tend to be heavier than the average batman.


Sir Donald Bradman, considered by many as the greatest batsman of all time, considered Tendulkar to have a batting style similar to his. In his biography, it is stated that "Bradman was most taken by Tendulkar's technique, compactness and shot production, and had asked his wife to have a look at Tendulkar, having felt that Tendulkar played like him. Bradman's wife, Jessie, agreed that they did appear similar."


Tendulkar at the crease, getting ready to face a delivery

Former Australian cricket team coach John Buchanan voiced his opinion that Tendulkar had become susceptible to the short ball early in his innings because of a lack of footwork.
 Buchanan also believes Tendulkar has a weakness while playing left-arm pace.
 He was affected by a series of injuries since 2004. Since then Tendulkar's batting has tended to be less attacking. Explaining this change in his batting style, Tendulkar has acknowledged that Tendulkar is batting differently because, firstly, no batsman can bat the same way for the entire length of a long career and, secondly, Tendulkar is a senior member of the team now and thus has more responsibility. During the early part of his career, Tendulkar was a more attacking batsman and frequently scored centuries at close to a run a ball. Ian Chappell, former Australian player, remarked in 2007 that "Tendulkar now, is nothing like the player Tendulkar was when Tendulkar was a young bloke".


Tendulkar has incorporated several modern and unorthodox strokes into his repertoire, including the paddle sweep, the scoop over short fine leg and the slash to third man over the slips' heads, over the last seven or eight years. He is often praised for his ability to adapt to the needs of his body and yet keep scoring consistently.

Tendulkar has taken 201 wickets across all three formats of the international game.

While Tendulkar is not a regular bowler, Tendulkar can bowl medium pace, leg spin, and off spin. He often bowls when two batsmen of the opposite team have been batting together for a long period, as Tendulkar can often be a useful partnership breaker.
 With his bowling, Tendulkar has helped secure an Indian victory on more than one occasion.
 He has taken 201 international wickets – 46 in Tests, 154 in ODIs where Tendulkar is India's twelfth highest wicket taker, and one wicket in Twenty20 Internationals.


To mark 150 years of the Cricketers' Almanack, Wisden named him in an all-time Test World XI.

Fan following
Sudhir Kumar Chaudhary, a fan of Tendulkar who earned the privilege of tickets to all of India's home games

Tendulkar's consistent performances earned him a fan following across the globe, including amongst Australian crowds, where Tendulkar has consistently scored centuries.
 One of the most popular sayings by his fans is "Cricket is my religion and Sachin is my God".
 Cricinfo mentions in his profile that "... Tendulkar remains, by a distance, the most worshipped cricketer in the world."
 During the Australian tour of India in 1998 Matthew Hayden said "I have seen God. He bats at no. 4 in India in Tests."
 However, on God, Tendulkar himself is reported to have said "I am not God of cricket. I make mistakes, God doesn't."
 Tendulkar made a special appearance in the Bollywood film Stumped in 2003, appearing as himself.


There have been many instances when Tendulkar's fans have undertaken extreme activities over his dismissal in the game. As reported by many Indian newspapers, a person hanged himself due to distress over Tendulkar's failure to reach his 100th century.


At home in Mumbai, Tendulkar's fan following has caused him to lead a different lifestyle. Ian Chappell has said that Tendulkar would be unable to cope with the lifestyle Tendulkar was forced to lead, having to "wear a wig and go out and watch a movie only at night".
 In an interview with Tim Sheridan, Tendulkar admitted that Tendulkar sometimes went for quiet drives in the streets of Mumbai late at night when Tendulkar would be able to enjoy some peace and silence.
 Tendulkar has a presence in the popular social networking site Twitter with the user name sachin_rt, since May 2010.

Achievements and awards
Main articles: Achievements of Sachin Tendulkar and List of ODI Awards for Sachin Tendulkar
See also: Player of the Match awards (cricket)
Tendulkar's Wax Statue in Madame Tussauds, London
Centuries against different nations 	Test 	ODI
 Australia 	11 	9
 Sri Lanka 	9 	8
 South Africa 	7 	5
 England 	7 	2
 New Zealand 	4 	5
 West Indies 	3 	4
 Zimbabwe 	3 	5
 Pakistan 	2 	5
 Bangladesh 	5 	1
 Kenya 	NA 	4
 Namibia 	NA 	1

Sachin Tendulkar is the leading run scorer in Tests, with 15,921 runs, as well as in One-Day Internationals, with 18,426 runs.
 He is the only player to score more than 30,000 runs in all forms of international cricket (Tests, ODIs and Twenty20 Internationals).
 He is the 16th player and the first Indian to score 50,000 runs in all forms of domestic and international recognised cricket (First-class, List A and Twenty20). He achieved this feat on 5 October 2013, during a Champions League Twenty20 match for his IPL team Mumbai Indians against Trinidad and Tobago.




In 2012, Tendulkar was ranked number 8 in Outlook India's poll of the Greatest Indian.


He also holds the record of the highest number of centuries in both Tests (51) and ODIs (49) as well as in Tests and ODIs combined (100). On 16 March 2012, Tendulkar scored his 100th international hundred. It came against Bangladesh in the league matches of Asia Cup 2012.
 He is also the only player to score fifty centuries in Test cricket,
 and the first to score fifty centuries in all international cricket combined.
 He also holds the world record for playing the highest number of Test matches (200)
 and ODI matches (463).
 Tendulkar has been part of most wins by an Indian in both Test cricket with 72 wins and ODIs with 234 wins and is third in the world in ODI victories after Ricky Ponting (262 wins), Mahela Jayawardene (241 wins).



Tendulkar has scored over 1000 runs in a calendar year in ODIs 7 times, and in 1998 Tendulkar scored 1,894 runs, the record for the highest number of runs scored by any player in a single calendar year for One-Day Internationals.
 He is the first male cricketer to score a double-century in one-day cricket.


He has been Man of the Match 13 times in Test matches and Man of the Series four times, out of them twice in the Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia.
 The performances earned him respect from Australian cricket fans and players.
 Similarly Tendulkar has been Man of the Match 62 times in One day International matches and Man of the Series 15 times.
 He became the first batsman to score 12,000, 13,000, 14,000 and 15,000 runs in Test cricket,[citation needed] having also been the third batsman and the first Indian to pass 11,000 runs in that form of the game.
 He was also the first player to score 10,000 runs in one-day internationals,
 and also the first player to cross every subsequent 1000-run mark that has been crossed in ODI cricket history.[citation needed] In the fourth Test of the 2008–09 Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia at Nagpur on 6 November 2008, Tendulkar surpassed Australia's Allan Border to become the player to cross the 50-run mark the most times in Test cricket history,
 and also the second ever player to score 11 Test centuries against Australia, tying with Sir Jack Hobbs of England more than 70 years previously.
 On 8 November 2011, Tendulkar became the first batsman to score 15,000 runs in Test Cricket.


Tendulkar has consistently done well in Cricket World Cups. He was the highest run scorer of the 1996 Cricket World Cup with a total of 523 runs and also of the 2003 Cricket World Cup with 673 runs.
 After his century against England during group stages of 2011 Cricket World Cup, Tendulkar became the player to hit most centuries in Cricket World Cups with six centuries and the first player to score 2000 runs in World Cup cricket.


An innings-by-innings breakdown of Tendulkar's Test match batting career showing runs scored (red and green bars) and the average of the last ten innings (blue line)
An innings-by-innings breakdown of Tendulkar's Test match batting career showing runs scored (red and green bars) and the average of the last ten innings (blue line)
National honours

    1994 – Arjuna Award, by the Government of India in recognition of his outstanding achievement in sports.

    1997–98 – Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna, India's highest honour given for achievement in sports.

    1999 – Padma Shri, India's fourth highest civilian award.

    2001 – Maharashtra Bhushan Award, Maharashtra State's highest Civilian Award.

    2008 – Padma Vibhushan, India's second highest civilian award.

    2014 – Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award.



Other honours
2013 postage stamps commemorating the Sachin Tendulkar 200th Test Match

    1997 – Wisden Cricketer of the Year.

    2002 – In commemorating Tendulkar's feat of equalling Don Bradman's 29 centuries in Test Cricket, automotive company Ferrari invited him to its paddock in Silverstone on the eve of the British Grand Prix on 23 July, to receive a Ferrari 360 Modena from the F1 world champion Michael Schumacher.

    2003 – Player of the tournament in 2003 Cricket World Cup.

    2004, 2007, 2010 – ICC World ODI XI.

    2009, 2010, 2011 – ICC World Test XI.
    2010 – Outstanding Achievement in Sport and the Peoples Choice Award at The Asian Awards in London.

    1998, 2010 – Wisden Leading Cricketer in the World.

    2006 - Polly Umrigar Award for International cricketer of the year

    2010 – ICC Award-Sir Garfield Sobers trophy for cricketer of the year.


    2010 – LG People's Choice Award.

    2010 – Made an Honorary group captain by the Indian Air Force.

    2011 – BCCI Cricketer of the Year award.

    2011 – Castrol Indian Cricketer of the Year award.

    2012 – Wisden India Outstanding Achievement award.

    2012 – Honorary Life Membership of Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG)


    2012 – Honorary Member of the Order of Australia, given by the Australian government.


    2013 – Indian Postal Service released a stamp of Tendulkar and Tendulkar became the second Indian after Mother Teresa to have such stamp released in their lifetime.

    2014 – ESPNCricinfo Cricketer of the Generation

    2017 – The Asian Awards Fellowship Award at the 7th Asian Awards.

Personal life
Family

On 24 May 1995, Tendulkar married Anjali Mehta (b. 1967), a paediatrician of Gujarati origin, whom Tendulkar had first met in 1990.



 They have a daughter Sara and a son Arjun whose skills in cricket as a teenager have been receiving attention.


Beliefs

Tendulkar is a practising Hindu. He is a devotee of the deity Ganesha and was a disciple of the guru Sathya Sai Baba of Puttaparthi, whom Tendulkar visited on several occasions.


 In 1997, Tendulkar captained the Indian National side, playing against a World Eleven team, in the Unity Cup which was held at the Sri Sathya Sai Hill View Stadium in Puttaparthi, in Baba's presence.

 The death of Sai Baba on Tendulkar's 38th birthday caused him to cancel his celebrations.

 The cricketer is also known to celebrate Ganesh Chaturthi at home and frequently visits temples during night when it is calm and quiet.


Business interests

Tendulkar's popularity has led him to be a pioneer in India on cricket business dealings when Tendulkar signed a record sports management deal with WorldTel in 1995, the value of the deal being ₹30 crore (US$4.3 million) over five years.

 His next contract with WorldTel in 2001 was valued at ₹80 crore (US$12 million) over five years.
 In 2006, Tendulkar signed a contract with Saatchi and Saatchi's ICONIX valued at ₹180 crore (US$26 million) over three years.


Tendulkar has opened two restaurants: Tendulkar's
 (Colaba, Mumbai) and Sachin's
 (Mulund, Mumbai) and Bangalore. Tendulkar owns these restaurants in partnership with Sanjay Narang of Mars Restaurants.[citation needed]

Tendulkar co-owns the Kochi ISL team in the Indian Super League Football in association with PVP Ventures owned by Prasad V Potluri. The team has been named as Kerala Blasters after his nickname "Master Blaster".


 He also jointly owns the badminton team Bengaluru Blasters which participates in the Premier Badminton League.


In 2013, Tendulkar was listed at 51st position in Forbes' list of world's highest-paid athletes, with his total earnings estimated to be US$22 million.
 In October 2013, the net worth of Tendulkar was estimated at US$160 million by Wealth-X, making him India's wealthiest cricket player.


Commercial endorsements

Sachin Tendulkar has been sponsored by several brands throughout his career including Boost (1990–present),
 Pepsi (1992–2009),
 Action Shoes (1995–2000),
 MRF (1999–2009),
 Adidas (2000–10), Britannia (2001–07),
 Fiat Palio (2001–03),
 TVS (2002–05),
 ESPN Star Sports (2002–present),
 Sunfeast (2007–13),
 Canon (2006–09),
 Airtel (2004–06),
 Rorito (2016–18),
 G-Hanz (2005–07),
 Sanyo BPL (2007–present),
 Toshiba (2010–present),
 Colgate-Palmolive,
 Philips,
 VISA,
 Castrol India (2011–12),
 Ujala Techno Bright,
 Coca-Cola (2011–13)
 and Musafir.com (2013–present).


He has also been a spokesperson for National Egg Coordination Committee (2003–05),
 AIDS Awareness Campaign (2005)
 and Luminous India (2010–present).

Rajya Sabha nomination

In April 2012, Tendulkar accepted the Rajya Sabha nomination proposed by the President of India and became the first active sportsperson and cricketer to have been nominated.

 Former cricketers Sanjay Manjrekar,
 Ajit Wadekar, Madan Lal
 expressed their surprise over this move. He took the oath of office on 4 June.
 He refused to take the bungalow allotted to him in New Delhi calling it "waste of taxpayers' money" as Tendulkar resides in Mumbai.
 He met with some controversy over his attendance at Rajya Sabha proceedings.
 In 2019, Tendulkar contributed Rs. 22 lakh from his MPLAD funds allotted to him during his stint as Rajya Sabha MP for the renovation of a Children's Park in East Bandra.
 In the past six years as a Rajya Sabha MP, Sachin had drawn nearly Rs 90 lakh in salaries and other monthly allowances. He donated this entire salary and allowances to the Prime Minister's Relief Fund. The PMO has also issued a letter of acknowledgement which states: "Prime Minister acknowledges this thoughtful gesture and conveys his gratitude. These contributions will be of immense help in providing assistance to the persons in distress.
 [check quotation syntax]
Philanthropy

Tendulkar sponsors 200 underprivileged children every year through Apnalaya, a Mumbai-based NGO associated with his mother-in-law, Annabel Mehta.

 A request by him on Twitter raised ₹1.02 crore (US$150,000) through Sachin's crusade against cancer for the Crusade against Cancer foundation.

 Sachin Tendulkar spent nine hours on the 12-hour Coca-Cola-NDTV Support My School telethon on 18 September 2011 that helped raise ₹ 7 crore – ₹ 2 crore more than the target – for the creation of basic facilities, particularly toilets for girl students, in 140 government schools across the country.

Autobiography

Sachin Tendulkar's autobiography, Playing It My Way, was released on 6 November 2014. It was listed in the 2016 Limca Book of Records for breaking the record for adult hardback pre-publication orders, with 1,50,289 copies confirmed.

Biographies
Books

Sachin Tendulkar has been the subject of various books. The following is the listing of books focused on Tendulkar's career:

    Sachin: The Story of the World's Greatest Batsman by Gulu Ezekiel. Publisher: Penguin Global. ISBN 978-0-14-302854-3

    Sachin Tendulkar Opus

    The A to Z of Sachin Tendulkar by Gulu Ezekiel. Publisher: Penguin Global. ISBN 978-81-7476-530-7

    Sachin Tendulkar-a definitive biography by Vaibhav Purandare. Publisher: Roli Books. ISBN 81-7436-360-2

    Sachin Tendulkar – Masterful by Peter Murray, Ashish Shukla. Publisher: Rupa. ISBN 81-7167-806-8

    If Cricket is a Religion, Sachin is God by Vijay Santhanam, Shyam Balasubramanian. Publisher: HarperCollins India ISBN 978-81-7223-821-6

    Master Stroke: 100 Centuries of Sachin Tendulkar by Neelima Athalye. Publisher: Sakal Publications. ISBN 978-93-80571-84-3

    Dhruvtara, a book on cricket maestro Sachin Tendulkar, was launched as an audio book on Monday, 15 October 2012 to mark White Cane Day.

    Sachin ke sau shatak by Dharmender Panth, a book on Tendulkar's 100 centuries written in Hindi. ISBN 9788123765242

    Playing It My Way – an autobiography. ISBN 978-14-736-0520-6



    Sachin: A Hundred Hundreds Now by V. Krishnaswamy


Films

    Sachin: A Billion Dreams, an Indian film directed by James Erskine is based on the life of Tendulkar where Tendulkar played his character himself.


Filmography
Key Films that have not yet been released 	Denotes films that have not yet been released
Year 	Film 	Director 	Note 	Ref.
1985 	Kabhie Ajnabi The 	Vijay Singh 	Cameo 	

2003 	Stumped 	Gaurav Pandey 	Cameo, Played himself 	

	God of Cricket Film has not yet been released 	Sudesh Kanojia 	Cameo, the film is based on his own life. 	

See also

    The Greatest Indian
    Achievements of Sachin Tendulkar
    Collection of quotations related to Sachin Tendulkar
    Indian national cricket captains
    List of international cricket centuries by Sachin Tendulkar
    List of One Day International cricket records
    Politics and sports
    Sudhir Kumar Chaudhary

    Cricketball.pngCricket portalFlag of India.svgIndia portal

Notes

Craig White, although born in Yorkshire was the first player to be signed as an overseas player by Yorkshire. He had to be listed as an overseas player as Tendulkar had already played for Victoria in Australia.

    Belinda Clark of the Australian women's cricket team was the first cricketer (of any gender) to score 200 or more in an ODI match. She scored 229* in a 1997 Women's Cricket World Cup match against Denmark.






References

Bal, Sambit. "Sachin Tendulkar—Cricinfo Profile". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2007.
"Sachin Tendulkar: How the Boy Wonder became Master Blaster". NDTV. 6 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
Gupta, Gaura (13 November 2013). "Top guns salute Master Blaster Sachin Tendulkar". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.

    "Sachin Tendulkar is greatest cricketer in history – Brian Lara". BBC. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013.
    "Sachin Tendulkar greatest batsman to have played cricket: Dennis Lillee". The Times of India. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
    "'Why Sachin Tendulkar is the greatest' by Michael Vaughan". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
    "Is Sachin Tendulkar the greatest batsman of all time?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013.
    Alex Brown (11 October 2013). "Cricket's greatest batsmen: Sachin Tendulkar v Don Bradman." Archived 16 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au
    "Revealed! What makes Sachin Tendulkar the greatest batsman..." rediff.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014.

"Records / Combined Test, ODI and T20I records / Batting records ; Most runs in career". ESPNcricinfo. 17 November 2013. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
"This day that year: 'Master Blaster' Sachin Tendulkar makes his Test debut". The Times of India. 15 November 2017. Retrieved 9 July 2018.
"How Sachin Tendulkar became the Little Master". BBC Sports. 16 March 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2018.
"Sachin Tendulkar: How the Boy Wonder became Master Blaster". NDTV. 6 November 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2018.
"Sachin Tendulkar: 'Master Blaster' calls it a day". Retrieved 9 July 2018.
"The Kohli v Tendulkar comparison".
"Tendulkar second-best ever: Wisden". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2008.
"Reliving a dream". The Hindu. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 19 May 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2011.
Template:Cite news7
"WG Grace and Shane Warne in Wisden all-time World Test XI". BBC. 23 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 October 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar in Wisden's All-time World Test XI". NDTV. 23 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2013.
"Padma Awards" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2015.
"Sachin first sportsperson to win country's highest civilian honour Bharat Ratna". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 17 January 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2013.
"Bharat Ratna for Prof CNR Rao and Sachin Tendulkar". Prime Minister's Office. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 November 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar and CNR Rao conferred Bharat Ratna". The Times of India. 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 4 February 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2014.
"CNR Rao, Sachin receive Bharat Ratna". The Hindu. 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar named cricketer of the year". Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010.
"Rajya Sabha stint". Hindustan Times. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 4 June 2012.
"Sachin becomes IAF's honorary Group Captain". The Times of India. PTI. 3 September 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Australia toughened up Sachin". The Australian. 8 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar receives Order of Australia". Zee News. 7 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012.
"the time 2010 time 100". time.
"Tendulkar announces limited-overs retirement". Wisden India. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012.
"Tendulkar calls time on IPL career". Wisden India. 26 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013.
"Tendulkar exits for 74, India build lead". ESPNcricinfo. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013.
Cricinfo (19 July 2019). "Sachin Tendulkar, Allan Donald, Cathryn Fitzpatrick inducted in ICC Hall of Fame". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 19 July 2019.
Abraham, Derek (24 April 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar: The multi-million dollar baby". Daily News and Analysis. Retrieved 11 May 2019.
"Happy Birthday Sachin Tendulkar: Master Blaster turns 46". India Today. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 11 May 2019.
"I am proud to be a Maharashtrian - Sachin Tendulkar". Indiatv.
"The Ala Re Sachin".
Khattar, Sakshi (3 April 2012). "Sachin Tendulkar: Who is he?". India Today.
Thani, L.; Mishra, R. (1999). Sensational Sachin. Diamond Pocket Books. p. 113. ISBN 81-288-2573-9. "His mother Rajni Tendulkar worked in L.I.C."
"Ajit Dotes on Sachin, Who Could've Guessed They're Half-Brothers!". The Quint. Retrieved 2 September 2018.
"This man sacrificed his cricket, career for Sachin Tendulkar". Asianet Newsable.
"38 special facts about Sachin Tendulkar – 3". MSN. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
"38 special facts about Sachin Tendulkar – 2". MSN. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
"Reminiscing old days: Sachin Tendulkar on late coach Ramakant Achrekar". in.com.
Gulu Ezekiel. "HTCricket.com: A special HTCricket section celebrating Sachin Tendulkar's 100th Test". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012.
Baliga, Linah (1 April 2011). "Shivaji Park prays for famous son". The Times of India. Times News Network.
Somak Sen (17 October 2008). "Sachin Tendulkar: The last word in cricket". Merinews. Retrieved 3 June 2009.[permanent dead link]
"Sachin credible: Master in a school cricket team!". Mid-day.com. 25 October 2013. Archived from the original on 28 October 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013.
Williams, Richard (15 May 1999). "Tendulkar's genius inspires awe". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012. Retrieved 17 February 2012.
"Tendulkar's interview with BBC". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Krishnan, G (30 October 2013). "When 13-year-old Sachin Tendulkar fielded for Pakistan team". DNA. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar and Sunil Gavaskar: Two masters and the amazing chemistry between the two". DNA India. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2013.
Booth, Lawrence. "Strange innovations". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 17 December 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
Naik, Nitin (1 April 2011). "Sachin Tendulkar: From ball boy to champ". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2012.
Williams, Richard (15 May 1999). "Ballboy to badshah, Sachin's Cup story- Sachin Tendulkar in a one-on-one with Lokendra Pratap sahi". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 17 February 2012.
Bhatia, Rahul (21 August 2004). "A tale of two terrors". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Cricinfo staff (16 November 2006). "Teenagers eclipse Tendulkar-Kambli record". Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"'A new dawn in Indian cricket': Remembering Sachin Tendulkar's iconic Ranji Trophy debut".
"Sachin Tendulkar factfile". espnstar.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
"Batting - Most Runs". ESPN Cricinfo. Retrieved 9 April 2018.
"Rest of India v Delhi in 1989/90". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
"Remembering Sachin Tendulkar's first England tours". mid-day.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2013.
"The Greatest Ranji Match ever played". Piyush Mishra. 8 February 2013. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 2 February 2014.
"Australia in India, 1997-98-Mumbai v Australians-Brabourne Stadium, Mumbai-24,25,26 February 1998 (3-day match)". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin Tendulkar". Cricket365.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"Ranji Trophy – 2nd semi final-2000-Mumbai v Tamil Nadu". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin puts knock of 233 'at the top'". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin Tendulkar's Bradmanesque achievements in Ranji Trophy". The Times of India. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Yorkshire players at Cricket Archive". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 10 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"His last words: Donald George Bradman". Daily News and Analysis. India. 13 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 11 March 2011.
"First-Class Matches played by Sachin Tendulkar". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
Miller, Andrew; Williamson, Martin (11 December 2007). "Eleven quirky debuts". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Sachin Tendulkar Timeline". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 May 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2009.
"Exhibition Match, Pakistan v India, 16 Dec 1989". ESPNcricinfo. 16 December 1989. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"A suitable beginning – Tendulkar takes Qadir on". Archived from the original on 4 November 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
"Cricket Records – India in Pakistan Test Series, 1989/90 – Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 August 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2009.
"Batting and Fielding for India in Wills Challenge 1989/90". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
"Sachin the youngest ever to play for India". Yahoo Cricket. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2013.
"Sachin the youngest ever to play for India in ODIs". Yahoo Cricket. Archived from the original on 23 November 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2013.
"Test Batting and Fielding for India in India in New Zealand 1989/90". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 6 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
"Batting and Fielding for India in Rothmans Cup Triangular Series 1989/90". Cricketarchive. Archived from the original on 10 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009.
Otway, Graham. "Wisden – England v India 1990". Wisden Almanack. Archived from the original on 26 November 2009. Retrieved 17 August 2009.
Saltau, Chloe (9 December 2007). "Tender touch". Melbourne: The Age Newspaper. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 12 December 2007.
"Sachin the opener". ESPN Cricinfo. Retrieved 1 April 2019.
"Sachin's First ODI Century". Archived from the original on 15 April 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Sachin's First ODI Ton". ESPN cricinfo. Archived from the original on 9 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2016.
"Cricket Records – Wills World Cup, 1995/96". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 2 February 2010.
Bal, Sambit. "Mad Max destroys India". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014.
"Wisden – INDIA v PAKISTAN". Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014.
"Team records | One-Day Internationals | Cricinfo Statsguru | ESPN Cricinfo". Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014.
"Australia in India, 1997-98-Mumbai v Australians-Brabourne Stadium, Mumbai-24,25,26 February 1998 (3-day match)". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
Nishad Pai Vaidya (25 February 2013). "When Sachin Tendulkar showed Shane Warne who is the boss". CricketCountry.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
Ramchand, Partab (24 February 2001). "Tendulkar's duel with Warne symbolised India's superiority". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 29 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
"Cricinfo Match Report, IND-AUS 1 April 1998". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 11 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin's operation Desert Storm". Ibnlive. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
"Down Memory Lane – Shane Warne's nightmare". Cricketnetwork. Archived from the original on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Tendulkar single handedly helped to win India". IBN Live.in. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Asian Test Championship from Feb 14 to March 17 (24 December 1998)". ESPNcricinfo. 24 December 1998. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2011.
"Sachin Tendulkar collides with Shoaib Akhtar". ESPN. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Riot police, fires and a sobbing Vinod Kambli". ESPNcricinfo. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011.
"Sri Lanka v India 1998–99". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011
Williamson, Martin (20 October 2010). "The run-out that sparked a riot". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 30 January 2011. "the second Championship ... was rendered fairly meaningless by the withdrawal of India because of another escalation of political tensions with Pakistan."
Ramchand, Partab (1 February 1999). "India succumb on home stretch despite Tendulkar's heroics". The Indian Express. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
"Sachin loses father, team loses its wits". Leicester/Mumbai. Agencies/ENS. 19 May 1999. Retrieved 20 March 2014.
Sahi, Lokendra Pratap (23 May 1999). "Sachin's Ton in Father's Memory". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
"List of Captains". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"List of ODI Captains". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"A tale of two captains". Rediff. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
McGregor, R.S. (1993). "Oxford Hindi–English Dictionary" (2004 ed.). Oxford University Press, USA.
Pradeep Magazine (20 December 1999). "Flat-track bullies bounced out again". The Indian Express. Melbourne. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
"2nd Test: Australia v India at Melbourne, Dec 26–30, 1999 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Jaishankar, Vedam (6 March 2000). "South Africa completes sweep with an innings and 71 runs". Retrieved 30 March 2014.
Ugra, Sharda (9 December 2000). "'I've survived and will survive longer'". India Today. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Ganguly took over in mid-2000 during a difficult period ..."
"Tendulkar suggested Dhoni's name: Pawar". Hindustan Times. India. PTI. 21 March 2008. Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2010.
"ICC Match Referee confirms disciplinary action for Indian cricketers". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Tendulkar appears before match referee". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Tendulkar handed suspended ban". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Indian media fury over Tendulkar". BBC News. London. 21 November 2001. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"ICC sets out latest position regarding South Africa v India". ESPNcricinfo. 23 November 2001. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2011.
"Indians cry foul". BBC News. London. 20 November 2001. Archived from the original on 14 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"2nd Test: India v Australia at Kolkata, Mar 11–15, 2001 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNCricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
Prabhu, Niraj (16 November 2013). "Of Tendulkar and his Goa milestone". The Goan. p. 28. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013.
"Tendulkar equals Sir Donald Bradman's record at Port of Spain". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
"Sachin equals The Don". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 October 2002. Retrieved 20 April 2002.
"Sachin equals Bradman's record – Twenty of Tendulkar's best Test hundreds". MSN. 27 April 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
"Swinging 60". Archived from the original on 8 May 2016.
"5th Test: West Indies v India at Kingston, May 18–22, 2002 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"A special rediff section celebrating Sachin Tendulkar's 100th Test". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
"Sachin outdoes Bradman with 30th Test hundred – Express India". The Indian Express. Reuters. 23 August 2002. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar produced 673 runs and 2 wicket in 2003 world cup without net practice, reveals Rahul Dravid". Patrika Group (5 August 2014). Archived from the original on 7 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar Timeline: 1989 to 2013". IBN. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Makes 673 runs in 11 matches in the ICC World Cup – ... wins him the player of the tournament award"
"Sachin received the Man of the Tournament award". Rediff. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
Lokapally, Vijay. "India tames the Aussies". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 30 September 2005. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Mukhopadhyay, Atreyo (15 November 2003). "Sachin, Sehwag demolish NZ". The Telegraph. Hyderabad. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
From the Vault: Hayden too big, too strong Archived 4 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
"4th Test: Australia v India at Sydney, Jan 2–6, 2004 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPN. Archived from the original on 5 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Sachin's bad performance in Test". King of Cricket. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"India high on Sehwag's 309". ESPNcricinfo. 29 March 2004. Archived from the original on 14 February 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011.
"'I was taken by surprise': Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"'Don't worry, Sachin': Miandad". Rediff. Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"'Declaration in bad taste': Intikhab Alam". Rediff. Archived from the original on 29 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"'The boys can be justifiably proud': Dravid". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
NDTVCricket. "Sachin's Tennis Elbow Injury". NDTV. Archived from the original on 23 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "In 2004, Tendulkar was diagnosed with tennis elbow, an injury that prevented him from lifting a cricket bat for almost 4 and half months."
Weaver, Paul. "Wisden – India v Australia". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "As Australia prepared ..., even the return of Tendulkar, who had been out of cricket for two months with tennis elbow, was overshadowed ..."
Cricinfo staff (5 November 2004). "India clinch a thriller". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/content/story/143090.html
Lynch, Steven (23 April 2011). "Tendulkar's tribulations, and the nervous 290s". Archived from the original on 25 September 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011
Premachandran, Dileep (6 February 2006). "Tendulkar the Strong". ESPNcricinfo. Peshawar. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Premachandran, Dileep (11 February 2006). "Yuvraj and Sehwag ease India to victory". ESPNcricinfo. Rawalpindi. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "The run-rate climbed ... when Tendulkar, who had eased to a run-a-ball 42, ..."
Cricinfo staff (13 February 2006). "'Special' Tendulkar a treat to watch, says Dravid". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Byrant, Nick (23 March 2006). "Is Sachin mortal?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2011
"2nd Match: India v West Indies at Kuala Lumpur, Sep 14, 2006 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Should have handled Sachin differently in 2007 World Cup: Chappell". The Times of India. 4 February 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"Tendulkar hurt by comments". Jamaica Gleaner News. Archived from the original on 28 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Tendulkar faces calls to retire". BBC News. 30 March 2007. Archived from the original on 4 October 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"2nd Test: Bangladesh v India at Dhaka, May 25–27, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"After Yuvraj breaks in, Sachin seals victory". The Indian Express. Belfast. PTI. 29 June 2007. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"Cricket Records | Future Cup, 2007 | Records | Most runs | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"3rd ODI: India v South Africa at Belfast, Jul 1, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"Tendulkar gets to 11,000 Test runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Statistics, NatWest Series India in England, 2007". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Statistics, Australia in India ODI Series, 2007/08". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Batting records / Combined Test, ODI and T20I records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013.
Vivek, G S (8 November 2007). "Sachin falls short of his own genius". The Indian Express. Mohali. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Sridhar, Nandita (16 November 2007). "Sachin Tendulkar stars as India clinches series". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards/content/story/334026.html
ICC ODI Team of the Year
http://www.espncricinfo.com/review2007/content/story/328571.html
"Cricket Records | Records | Border-Gavaskar Trophy, 2007/08 | Most runs". ESPNcrcinfo. ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Australia wins the first match". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
Vivek, G S (4 January 2008). "Tendulkar lords over Sydney, cracks 38th century". The Indian Express. Sydney. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Binoy, George; Gopalakrishna, HR (4 January 2008). "Tendulkar's SCG success and Gilchrist bags No. 400". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Premachandran, Dileep (19 January 2008). "Inspired India end Australia's streak". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Premachandran, Dileep (24 January 2008). "Tendulkar ton lights up keen contest". Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"3rd ODI: India v South Africa at Belfast, Jul 1, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Sachin reaches to 16000 runs". IBN Live. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013.
"Batting records | One-Day Internationals | Cricinfo Statsguru | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Vivek, G.S. (26 February 2008). "India hammer final nail". Hobart. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"1st Final: Australia v India at Sydney, 2 March 2008". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"2nd Final: Australia v India at Brisbane, 4 March 2008". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards2008/content/story/383924.html
"Statistics / Statsguru / Sachin Tendulkar/Test Cricket". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 25 April 2015.
"f50749 t1870 India v South Africa: South Africa in India 2007/08 (1st Test)". Cricket Archive. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011
"Tendulkar to miss Bangladesh tri-series and Asia Cup". 29 May 2008. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 3 April 2011
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Test matches: Series average". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2011.
Alter, Jamie (19 August 2008). "India need to fix opening problem". ESPNcricinfo. Dambulla. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"1st Test: India v Australia at Bangalore, Oct 9–13, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2013.
"Sachin reaches 12000 runs and breaks Lara's Record". The Times of India. 17 October 2008. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013.
Pradhan, Kunal (18 October 2008). "12,000 and counting, but Tendulkar isn't just about numbers". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Special Correspondent (18 October 2008). "Tendulkar scales another peak". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008. Retrieved 18 October 2008. ""It is definitely the biggest achievement in 19 years of my career," the 35-year-old said ..."
Coverdale, Brydon (29 October 2008). "Gambhir century sets India on course". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Alter, Jamie (10 November 2008). "India reclaim the Border-Gavaskar Trophy". Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"4th ODI: India v England at Bangalore, Nov 23, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013.
Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (27 November 2008). "Indian juggernaut rolls on". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (28 November 2008). "One-Day International series called off". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
"England players fly back home". The Indian Express. Bangalore/London. Agencies. 29 November 2008. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014.
McGlashan, Andrew (15 December 2008). "Tendulkar century sets up famous win". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2013.
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Test matches". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
Dwivedi, Sandeep (15 December 2008). "This century, this win is for victims of terror". Chennai. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards2008/content/story/385010.html
"India v England at Mohali, Dec 19–23, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 April 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/369272.html
http://www.espncricinfo.com/review2008/content/story/385077.html
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
Veera, Sriram (8 March 2009). "Sachin makes 163 runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
"Auckland ODI: New Zealand win by 8 wickets". India Today. PTI. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
Premachandran, Dileep (21 March 2009). "India end drought with thumping win". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
"2nd Test: New Zealand v India at Napier, Mar 26–30, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"3rd Test: New Zealand v India at Wellington, Apr 3–7, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Wellington Test ends in a draw, India win series". India Today. Wellington. Agencies. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
"Tendulkar, Zaheer rested; Nehra in for Caribbean tour". The Indian Express. New Delhi. Agencies. 17 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
"2nd Match: India v New Zealand at Colombo (RPS), Sep 11, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"3rd Match: Sri Lanka v India at Colombo (RPS), Sep 12, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
Hemant, AR (14 September 2009). "India beat Sri Lanka in Compaq Cup final; Harbhajan takes 5 after Tendulkar's 138". India Today. New Delhi. ITGD. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
Rajesh, S (14 September 2009). "Tendulkar's final onslaught". Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
"India lose Champions Trophy opener against Pak by 54 runs". The Indian Express. Centurion. Agencies. 27 September 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
Dwivedi, Sandeep (29 September 2009). "India's chances watered down". The Indian Express. Centurion. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014.
Dinakar, S. (1 October 2009). "India beats Windies, but bows out of tournament". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
"Australia scores 350/4 in the Fifth ODI". ESPN. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
Monga, Sidharth (5 November 2009). "Australia survive terrific Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (6 November 2009). "Tendulkar's incandescent innings in vain". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
"Sachin becomes the First Player to achieve the 17000 run mark". TOI. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
"Statistics / Statsguru / One-Day Internationals / Batting records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards2009/content/story/448717.html
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2014.
Sridhar, Nandita (28 December 2009). "Minefield of a pitch forces abandonment". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014.
"5th ODI: India v Sri Lanka at Delhi, Dec 27, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014.
"India vs SL Test Series 2009". Archived from the original on 4 August 2011.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/427665.html
"Tendulkar rested for Bangladesh Tri-series". New Delhi. Agencies. 25 December 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014.
"1st Test: Bangladesh v India at Chittagong, Jan 17–21, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"2nd Test: Bangladesh v India at Dhaka, Jan 24–27, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"1st Test: India v South Africa at Nagpur, Feb 6–9, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar slams 47th Test century". The Times of India. TNN. 15 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
Kumar, Rajesh. "Highlights: Kolkata Test, Day 2". NDTV. Archived from the original on 10 June 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2014.
Naik, Nitin (8 March 2010). [view-source:http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/sports/cricket/women-cricket/news/Before-Sachin-there-was-Belinda-Clark/articleshow/5655876.cms "Before Sachin, there was Belinda Clark"] Check |url= value (help). The Times of India. TNN. Retrieved 19 April 2014.
Nataranjan, H (17 December 1997). "Aussie skipper scores double ton. News is it's not Steve Waugh". The Indian Express. Retrieved 19 April 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar fires record 200 against South Africa". BBC Sport. London. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2010.
"Tendulkar double ton leads India to series win". Gwalior: Rediff. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2010.
"Sachin Tendulkar "The God" creates History again". DownTheWicket. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards2010/content/story/500092.html
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/480081.html
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/480086.html
http://www.espncricinfo.com/awards2011/content/story/551872.html
"ICC Cricket World Cup, 2010/11 / Records / Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011
Miller, Andrew (2 April 2011). "Dhoni and Gambhir lead India to World Cup glory". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 April 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011
"'I couldn't control my tears of joy'". ESPNcricinfo. 2 April 2011. Archived from the original on 4 April 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011
"Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar /One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"List of Test victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 January 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"List of ODI victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"List of T20I victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
https://sports.ndtv.com/world-cup-2011/sachin-zaheer-yuvi-in-iccs-world-cup-xi-1572998
http://www.espncricinfo.com/icc_cricket_worldcup2011/content/story/509646.html
"Tendulkar not thinking of 100th hundred". ESPNcricinfo. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2011
"Tendulkar ruled out of series". ESPNcricinfo. 5 September 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011
Miller, Andrew (16 August 2011). "Swann content with team success". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 22 August 2011
"Sachin Tendulkar passes 15,000 Test runs". BBC Sport. 9 November 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2011.
"Sachin Tendulkar becomes the first batsman to score 15,000 Test runs". Cricket Wizard. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/529914.html
"Sachin Tendulkar needs to introspect: Ian Chappell". NDTV Sports. 3 March 2015. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2015.
"Why is Sachin Tendulkar still playing? ..." International Reporter.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012.
"Sachin returns, Laxman retained in squad for NZ Tests". 10 August 2012. Archived from the original on 13 August 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar gets his ton of tons". NDTV. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2012.
"'Been a tough phase for me' – Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2012.
"Bangladesh beat India after Sachin's 100th". IBNLive. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013.
Cricketnext Staff (2 November 2012). "Ranji Trophy: Sachin roars back to form; Sehwag, Gambhir miss out". Cricketnext.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012.
David Hopps (26 November 2012). "England spinners humiliate India". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012.
Sanjjeev K Samyal; Firoz Mirza (27 November 2012). "I'm not getting runs, now it's your call: Sachin to selectors". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012.
Vinay Nayudu (28 December 2012). "Sachin Tendulkar's mind is only on cricket". Times News Network. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2012.
"Speculation over Tendulkar's retirement downplayed". IANS. 28 November 2012. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012.
"Tendulkar, Jaffer hit hundreds in Ranji quarterfinal". Yahoo! Cricket. 6 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
"3rd Quarter-final: Mumbai v Baroda at Mumbai, Jan 6–10, 2013 | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
Diwan, Kunal (16 January 2013). "Spunky Services stretch Mumbai". Yahoo! Cricket. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
Ugra, Sharda (21 January 2013). "Mumbai demolish Services to enter 44th Ranji final". ESPNcricinfo. Delhi. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
Sampath, Skandan (27 January 2013). "Unfortunate that Sachin got run out: Jaffer". Yahoo! Cricket. Archived from the original on 30 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
Ravindran, Siddarth (28 January 2013). "Mumbai boss their way to No. 40". ESPNcricinfo. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012.
Rao, K Shriniwas (8 June 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar equals Sunil Gavaskar's first-class record". NDTV. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2013.
"Hindustan Times Article". Mumbai. Press Trust of India. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar announces retirement from ODIs". Mumbai. PTI. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012.
Wisden India staff and Agencies (23 December 2012). "Tributes to Tendulkar". Wisden India. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012.
"Sachin is right in not playing international T20: Rajput". Archived from the original on 25 January 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar, Rahul Dravid bid goodbye, Twitter overflows with emotion". NDTV. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar announces retirement from Test cricket". The Times of India. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar: India batting legend to retire from all cricket". BBC Sport. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013.
"Tendulkar to bid farewell in Mumbai". Wisden India. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2013.
"Will consider Sachin Tendulkar's request to play 200th Test in Mumbai, says BCCI". NDTV. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
Cricbuzz (26 November 2016), Episode 1: The Little Master Bids Goodbye (English version), retrieved 17 January 2018
"MCA honours Sachin Tendulkar". The Hindu. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013.
Narula, Chetan (13 November 2013). "Fans get shortchanged in build-up to Sachin Tendulkar's last Test". Live Mint. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013.
Chadband, Ian (14 November 2013). "1.2 billion say goodbye to Little Master". Mumbai: WAtoday. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
"Salaam Sachin India Today Conclave kick-starts with Ajit Tendulkar". AFAQS. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
"MCC v Rest of the World – 5 July". Lord's. 5 July 2014. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2014.
"Tendulkar announced as ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 Ambassador" Archived 27 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"International Cricket Council", 22 December 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar announced as ICC World Cup 2015 ambassador" Archived 26 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"IbnLive", 22 December 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar Named Cricket World Cup 2015 Ambassador" Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"NDTV Sports", 23 December 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar Named As 2015 Cricket World Cup Ambassador" Archived 22 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine,"AffairsCloud", 22 December 2014.
"Tendulkar to lead 'Mumbai Indians'". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Kelso, Paul (20 February 2008). "Testosterone sparks Indian Premier League bidding frenzy". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin breaks Shaun Marsh's IPL record for Most Runs scored in a single season and Tendulkar also Received the Best Batsman and Best Captain Award". IBN. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"IPL: Virat Kohli breaks Sachin Tendulkar's record". Archived from the original on 8 May 2016.
http://www.espncricinfo.com/ipl2010/content/story/457382.html
http://www.espncricinfo.com/indian-premier-league-2011/content/story/517150.html
"CLT20 Mumbai Indians | IPL Cricket Live, Season 5 IPL Cricket 2012, CLT20, IPL 2012 Schedule, IPL Fixtures, IPL Online, IPL Live, Champions League T20 Live Cricket". Iplcricketlive.org. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Records / Indian Premier League / Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2011
"Sachin appointed as Mumbai Indian Team Icon". IBN. Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2014.
"IPLT20.com - Indian Premier League Official Website". www.iplt20.com. Retrieved 8 September 2018.
"Sachin Tendulkar Profile - ICC Ranking, Age, Career Info & Stats - Cricbuzz". Cricbuzz. Retrieved 8 September 2018.
Sekhar, Senjam Raj (12 June 2011). "Fundamentals". Deccan Chronicle. Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2012.
"Nostalgic Sachin recalls writing letters to wife Anjali". O Heraldo. PTI. 27 February 2014. p. 16. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Tendulkar is a righthanded batsman but uses his left for writing."
"Straight drive is my favourite shot, says Tendulkar". The Times of India. 18 September 2011. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012. Retrieved 23 September 2011.
"AFP: Tendulkar a special talent, says Gavaskar". 18 October 2008. Archived from the original on 21 October 2008. Retrieved 27 November 2008.
"Five players who used heavy bats". 22 September 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2018.
"Bradman never missed a Tendulkar innings in last five years". ESPNcricinfo. 16 August 2001. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2007.
"I dream of genius ..." Observer Sport Monthly. 4 August 2002. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Buchanan spots Sachin's weakness!". Deccan Herald. India. Archived from the original on 2 December 2007. Retrieved 14 December 2007.
"Next change: the superstars of the future". Cricinfo. 30 July 2007. Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. Retrieved 31 December 2007.
"Sachin incorporates several Unorthodox shots". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Sachin can bowl Medium Pace, Off Spin and Leg Spin". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 8 November 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"1st ODI: India v Pakistan at Kochi, 2 April 2005". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Cricinfo Statsguru –All-Test- One-Day Internationals-Twenty20Internationals – Bowling records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2012.
"WG Grace and Shane Warne in Wisden all-time World Test XI". BBC. 23 October 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2019.
"Brown moots honour for Tendulkar". The Economic Times. India. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Surendran, CP (29 March 2010). "Why English fails Tendulkar". The Times of India.
"I am not god of cricket: Tendulkar". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 4 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
Abhishek Boyanpalli (10 October 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar retires: 100 facts about the Little Master bowing out after 24 years". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2013.
"Sachin fan hangs himself". The Times of India. TNN. 3 April 2011. Retrieved 30 May 2012.
Murzello, Clayton (1 February 2012). "Figures, But Only of Speech". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar joins Twitter". NDTV. Archived from the original on 20 February 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Records / Combined First-class, List A and Twenty20 / Batting records ; Most runs in career". ESPNcricinfo. 27 September 2013. Archived from the original on 8 October 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013.
"CLT20: Sachin Tendulkar first Indian to reach 50,000 runs in all formats". 5 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013.
Andrew Fidel Fernando (5 October 2013). "Smith puts Mumbai in all-IPL final". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. "Tendulkar crossed the 50,000-run aggregate for recognised cricket across all formats in ..."
https://www.outlookindia.com/magazine/story/a-measure-of-the-man/281949
"Tendulkar scores his 100th international century". Archived from the original on 19 March 2012.
"India's Sachin Tendulkar hits 50th Test century in first Test against South Africa". The Daily Telegraph. UK. 19 December 2010. Archived from the original on 22 December 2010. Retrieved 27 December 2010.
Rudra, Tanya (24 November 2017). "Fastest batsmen to score 50 international centuries". Yahoo! Cricket. Retrieved 11 May 2019.
"Records | Test matches | Individual records (captains, players, umpires) | Most matches in career | ESPN Cricinfo". Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar in Numbers". BCCI. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2014.
"All-round records | Test matches | Cricinfo Statsguru | ESPN Cricinfo". stats.espncricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2015.
"All-round records | One-Day Internationals | Cricinfo Statsguru | ESPN Cricinfo". stats.espncricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2015.
"Statistics, Sachin Tendulkar in Tests". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Soni, Paresh (28 July 2007). "2nd Test England v India". BBC News. London. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin Tendulkar Timeline: 1989 to 2013". IBN. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Sachin breaks Border record: Tendulkar is a genius (Nagpur)". Cricket Crowd. 2008. Retrieved 19 April 2014.
"Cricinfo Statsguru – Test matches – Batting records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2008.
"Sachin Tendulkar passes 15,000 Test runs". BBC. 9 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
"Sachin scores the highest runs in the 1996 and 2003 World Cup". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Ballboy in 1987, now highest run-getter in World Cups". NDTV. 10 March 2011. Archived from the original on 13 March 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
"Cricket Records | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"List of Arjuna Awardees". Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"List of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award Winners". Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Padma Awards Directory, 1954–2007" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin got Maharashtra Bhushan award". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 2 December 2009.
"Tendulkar receives Padma Vibhushan". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 6 May 2008. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin becomes the Wisden Crciketer of the Year". ESPN. Archived from the original on 23 March 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"When Sachin met Schumacher". Rediff. Archived from the original on 27 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin included in ICC World ODI 11". MSN. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Sachin Awarded in London". The Economic Times. 27 October 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"WISDEN'S LEADING CRICKETER IN THE WORLD". 2010. Wisden. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 6 July 2012.
Staff (16 December 2007). "Seniors honoured at BCCI awards". Rediff.com. Retrieved 22 July 2019.
"Sachin wins Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy". ESPN. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Sachin wins the People's Choice Award". The FICA. 6 October 2010. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"Tendulkar, Durani honoured at BCCI awards". ESPNcricinfo. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2011
"Sachin, Mohinder Bag Top Honors at Castrol Awards for Cricketing Excellence". Castrol India. 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Retrieved 29 January 2011
"Wisden India Outstanding Achievement award for Tendulkar". Wisden India. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar presented with Honorary SCG Membership". sydneycricketground.com.au. 26 February 2012. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015.
"Sachin Tendulkar gets honorary life membership of SCG". The Indian Express. 24 December 2012. Archived from the original on 17 March 2013.
"Sachin's stamp released; MCA removes Kohli's hoardings from Wankhede". The Hindu. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 14 November 2013.
"The 20-year dream". ESPNCricinfo. 14 March 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2019.
Bezbaruah, Ajit (23 November 2013). "The God and his Gujarat connections". The Times of India.
Chadband, Ian (11 November 2013). "How family helps Indian great Sachin Tendulkar hold the world at bay". The Telegrapgh. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2017.
"I didn't even know who Sachin was when we first met: Anjali". Hindustan Times. 14 November 2009. Retrieved 12 May 2017.
"Sachin Tendulkar To Celebrate A Quiet Marriage Anniversary". Press Trust of India. ndtv.com. 25 May 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2017.
"Sachin Tendulkar's son Arjun selected for the under-14 Mumbai team". 10 January 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2013.
"Arjun Tendulkar bowls in England nets". ESPN Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2015.
"Deccan Herald – Tendulkar cancels birthday celebrations, prays for Sai Baba". Deccan Herald. 24 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Indian Express – Sai Devotee Sachin". The Indian Express. 24 April 2011. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Sai bhakt Sachin calls off birthday celebrations". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 2 August 2013.[dead link]
"Arjuna Ranatunga's Article". Vedamu. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Tendulkar pays homage to Sri Sathya Sai". Zee News. 25 April 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Sachin in tears while paying last respects to Sathya Sai Baba". Deccan Herald. 25 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"The master mourns his guru". Hindustan Times. 26 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Personal Info' on Sachin Tendulkar". Yehhai cricket. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar". Liveindia. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Sachin signs the Sports Management Deal with World Tel". NDTV. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013.
"A Brand Name called Sachin Tendulkar". The Times of India. India. 7 August 2002. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"$17 mn deal for Sachin". Rediff. 16 May 2001. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Tendulkar signs $40-million contract". Mail & Guardian Online. 4 May 2006. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Sachin opens restaurant, plans chains". Rediff. 19 July 2002. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Tendulkar expanding restaurant business". The Economic Times. 17 October 2004. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
Basu, Saumyajit (14 April 2014). "Stars embrace soccer through Indian Super League". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 June 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar names his football team 'Kerala Blasters'". The Times of India. PTI. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
PTI (27 May 2014). "Sachin Tendulkar's Indian Super League Team Named 'Kerala Blasters'". NDTV. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar picks up stake in PBL franchise Bengaluru Blasters". mid-day. 8 December 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2019.
"#51 Sachin Tendulkar – In Photos: The World's 100 Highest-Paid Athletes". Forbes. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
ET Bureau (7 June 2013). "Retiring Tendullkar is India's Wealthiest Cricket Player". wealthx.com. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
ET Bureau (7 June 2013). "Richest Sachin Tendulkar now worth $160m: Wealth X". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
Prabhakar, Binoy (1 April 2012). "No new endorsement after century of centuries; is Sachin Tendulkar's brand aura on the wane?". The Economic Times. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Pepsi celebrates Sachin at 29". Business Line. 25 April 2002. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"The Don and the New Master". India Today. 7 September 1998. Archived from the original on 22 April 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Tendulkar Closes MRF Innings after Decade at Crease". 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013.
"Sachin to bat for Britannia". The Financial Express. 2 November 2001. Archived from the original on 19 November 2001. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
Chatterjee, Dev (30 August 2003). "Sachin's Fiat tie-up may end soon". The Indian Express. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"TVS signs Sachin as brand ambassador". Business Line. 16 February 2002. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Sachin to bat for ESPN-Star Sports". The Indian Express. India. 7 February 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"ITC signs Sachin Tendulkar as co-creator". The Economic Times. 14 November 2006. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Canon clicks Sachin as brand ambassador". Business Line. 7 November 2006. Archived from the original on 14 November 2009. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Airtel drops Tendulkar as brand ambassador". The Indian Express. India. 3 November 2006. Archived from the original on 25 January 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Reynolds Pens' Indian licensee to go solo with launch of Rorito brand".
"G-Hanz unveils 'safe' mobiles". The Indian Express. India. 24 January 2007. Archived from the original on 9 August 2010. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
Badrinath, Raghuvir (4 January 2006). "Sachin to bat for Sanyo-BPL". Business Standard. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar is the new face of Toshiba". Business Standard. 1 July 2010. Archived from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar makes money faster than runs". The Indian Express. 19 May 1999. Archived from the original on 25 February 2008. Retrieved 3 March 2008.
"Sachin to Bat for Castrol". Castrol India. Archived from the original on 2 February 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011.
"Ujala Techno Bright". Jyothy Laboratories. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Coke ropes in Sachin as its 'happiness ambassador'". The Economic Times. 24 January 2011. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
Our Bureau. "Musafir.com to invest Rs 100 crore in India". Business Line. Archived from the original on 28 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013.
"Hatching a new game plan". Business Line. 2 December 2010. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
"Sachin & BCCI to spread AIDS Awareness message". Thatscricket. 22 March 2005. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007.
"Luminous Signs the legend Sachin Tendulkar as Brand Ambassador". Technics Today. 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar accepts Congress's Rajya Sabha nomination offer: reports". India: CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012.
Tagore, Vijay (28 April 2012). "Sachin Tendulkar in Parliament: House that?". DNA India. Archived from the original on 4 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
"Not everyone game for Sachin in Rajya Sabha". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 28 April 2012. Archived from the original on 30 April 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar sworn in as Rajya Sabha MP". The Times of India. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar turns down government quarter". DNA Media, Mumbai. Archived from the original on 13 June 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012.
"Sachin Tendulkar yet to attend parliament this year". The Times of India. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014.
"Mumbai: Sachin gifts childhood park a makeover". The Times of India. 8 March 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/mp-tendulkar-donates-his-salary-to-pms-relief-fund/articleshow/63566139.cms.
"Sachin sponsors 200 children". thatscricket.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013.
"Sachin sponsors 200 children of apnalaya". Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar raises Rs 10 Million for Cancer Charity". Breakingnewsonline.net. 29 May 2010. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Sachin's social responsibility – Behindindia.com – General News – Sachin Tendulkar Apnalaya". behindindia.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009.
"Humble Sachin Tendulkar helps telethon raise Rs 7 crore for schools – Sport – DNA". Daily News and Analysis. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012.
"Bestselling adult hardback on release (orders on first day of publication)". Limca Book of Records. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2016.
Book: Sachin: The Story of the World's Greatest Batsman. ISBN 0143028545.
"One Sachin Tendulkar Opus to cost $350,000 : Cricket, News". India Today. 5 December 2011. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013.
"Man of letters". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Willow talk". The Telegraph. Kolkota, India. 12 March 2005. Archived from the original on 29 October 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
"Sachin Tendulkar – Masterful". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008.
Book: If Cricket is a Religion, Sachin is God. ISBN 8172238215.
"Book: Master Stroke: 100 Centuries of Sachin Tendulkar". Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 28 March 2012.
"The Indian Express".
"Sachin ke sau shatak". Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013.
"Sachin Tendulkar's 'Playing It My Way' autobiography to release on November 6". Deccan Chronicle. Archived from the original on 2 September 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar to launch his autobiography "Playing It My Way" on 6 November". Zee News. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2014.
"Sachin Tendulkar's autobiography releasing on Nov 6". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2014.
Srivastava, Prateek (13 June 2012). "'Sachin: A Hundred Hundreds Now' is a potpourri". IBN Live. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2015.
"Sachin Tendulkar's movie teaser on April 14th". The Indian Express. 11 April 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2016.
"Kabhie Ajnabi The (1985)". www.cinestaan.com. Retrieved 16 February 2019.
"Stumped (2003)". Cinestaan. Retrieved 16 February 2019.

    "Sangram Singh to star in God of Cricket". The Indian Express. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019.

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sachin Tendulkar.
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Sachin Tendulkar

    Sachin Tendulkar on Twitter
    Sachin Tendulkar at ESPNcricinfo
    Sachin Tendulkar at Wisden India

Preceded by
Lance Klusener 	World Cup Player of the Series winner
2003 	Succeeded by
Glenn McGrath
Awards and achievements

    vte

Sachin Tendulkar

    vte

India Test cricket captains

    vte

India ODI cricket captains
Awards and Achievements
India squads
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    GND: 130548944 ISNI: 0000 0000 7874 3067 LCCN: n89265611 NTA: 244039380 VIAF: 53288006 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 53288006

Categories:

    Sachin Tendulkar1973 birthsCricketers at the 1992 Cricket World CupCricketers at the 1996 Cricket World CupCricketers at the 1998 Commonwealth GamesCricketers at the 1999 Cricket World CupCricketers at the 2003 Cricket World CupCricketers at the 2007 Cricket World CupCricketers at the 2011 Cricket World CupCricketers from MumbaiFollowers of Sathya Sai BabaHonorary Members of the Order of AustraliaIndia Blue cricketersIndia One Day International cricketersIndia Test cricket captainsIndia Test cricketersIndia Twenty20 International cricketersIndian Air Force officersIndian cricket coachesIndian cricketersIndian Premier League coachesIndian HindusInternational Cricket Council Cricketer of the YearKerala Blasters FC ownersLiving peopleMarathi peopleMan of the Tournament in ODI WorldcupMumbai cricketersMumbai Indians cricketersRecipients of the Arjuna AwardRecipients of the Bharat RatnaRecipients of the Maharashtra Bhushan AwardRecipients of the Padma Shri in sportsRecipients of the Padma Vibhushan in sportsRecipients of the Rajiv Gandhi Khel RatnaWest Zone cricketersWisden Cricketers of the YearWisden Leading Cricketers in the WorldYorkshire cricketers

INTERVIEW

There was a time when watching Sachin Tendulkar was exciting. Today it is a joy.

The free spirit is now the senior statesman in the team with new priorities and greater goals to achieve.

But that has not taken anything away from his batting prowess and his insurmountable achievements. His 141 in the second one-day game at Rawalpindi was one of the better one-day knocks witnessed in Pakistan.     

After returning to Pakistan, the country where Tendulkar made his Test debut 15 years ago, it has been a dream come true for Tendulkar to be part of the first Indian team ever to win a cricket series in Pakistan in more than 50 years.

Two days after the historic win, Tendulkar spoke to Assistant Editor Faisal Shariff about the one-day series and his goals.  

The Indian team has time and again repeated that this is just another game of cricket for them, but do you feel that extra edge when playing Pakistan?

Of course, it is a little more than playing anyone else. You realise that this is special when the calls from friends and well wishers increase. It is no doubt more challenging and more of a pressure game than playing any other country.

But eventually it is a game of cricket. My point of view is that when I am playing cricket I cannot think that this game is less or more important. I want to give my six hours of serious cricket on the ground and then take whatever the result. There will
always be expectations, but then you can't do much about it. 

You had sleepless nights before the game against Pakistan in the World Cup. How many sleepless nights have you had here playing back to back matches against Pakistan in Pakistan?

It has been very good here, but the World Cup game was different. It had a different significance to it. It was a crunch game for us because before that we hadn't done well in the World Cup.

This is obviously a big tour for us and I am happy we have been well prepared for it. The Australian tour was good for us; it was ideal preparation for us. We spent four months together and that really helped. As a team we figured out our strengths and weaknesses. It has been a very exciting tour, there is pressure and there is the joy of victory. But this tour will not match the World Cup game. 

How has the experience been so far with regard to the cricket?

It has been great. It has been a collective performance from the team. And that is the reason why this victory is great, because different players have made contributions to the win. Someone scored a quick 10 runs, someone got a run-out and the team clicked as a whole unit.

Peshawar was a different track and the toss was crucial, but other than that the whole team played well.

How would you describe the catch you took to dismiss Inzamam-ul-Haq in the final game?              

It was a crucial catch. I had it at the back of my mind that Tendulkar had played that shot before in the first one-dayer in Karachi and in the fourth one-dayer in Lahore. I was ready for that catch, hoping that Inzy would go for the shot again. Inzy is a great player who can just take the game away from you. His wicket was very important.

How is the Pakistan bowling attack as compared to the bowling attack you played 15 years ago?

This is a good bowling side with a good blend of youth and experience. Shoaib Akhtar has been playing for 5, 6 years and is an experienced bowler. Along with Mohammad Sami and Shabbir Ahmed they form a formidable team. Saqlain Mushtaq has done well against us.

But the attack in 1989 had Imran Khan, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis. That attack was more experienced. Imran Khan did not become Imran Khan overnight. He worked hard to become a legend. Wasim and Waqar were amazing bowlers. I would put them right up there with the best in the world.

Does the 136 you scored in Chennai play at the back of your mind on the eve of another Test series against Pakistan?

Before coming here I had a minor back problem and I thought whenever I play Pakistan I get a back problem. Why is that? But thankfully it has settled down now and I am fine. Even in South Africa during the World Cup when I played Pakistan I had a back problem and so also in Chennai.

But that defeat still is a huge disappointment for me. 

You have more runs than anyone else in international cricket. What is your ultimate goal?

There is no set goal. There is no target as such. I just keep it simple. Watch the ball and play it on merit.

I have played for 15 years and it has been a dream. I always had a dream to play for India but I never let it put pressure on me. I never let it affect me; instead I kept positive thoughts and made sure that I have something to show. I have never thought where I will go, or forced any targets on myself.
Sachin Tendulkar launched his much-awaited autobiography 'Playing It My Way' on Wednesday at an event in Mumbai that was attended by cricketing legends Sunil Gavaskar and Ravi Shastri, Tendulkar's wife Anjali, and his long-time teammates Rahul Dravid, Sourav Ganguly and VVS Laxman. Watch video: Co-author of Sachin's autobiography speaks ahead of launch

Cricket legend and Member of Parliament Tendulkar presented the first copy of the book to his mother Rajni.

Cricket historian Boria Majumdar co-authored Tendulkar's autobiography, that took over three years to complete. Here is the full text of the interview to Majumdar.

I have interviewed Sachin many times as a journalist, and perhaps for over hundred hours as his co-author, but this is the first interview after having written the book. Finally the book is a reality.

Thank you for the wonderful moments we've spent in the three years it took to complete the book, trying to put everything together, and for me to recall everything and make sure we've done an honest effort to put things across to the people. I am really excited now that the book is completed.

I'll begin the interview with two questions, first your highest point, the World Cup win of 2011, and second your lowest point, the World Cup defeat of 2007. We've talked at length about the 2011 World Cup, but in the book you say three of your team-mates did something very special for you.

The highest point was definitely the World Cup, but once we got back to the hotel floor that was booked for players, all the room doors were open, there was champagne flowing everywhere and loud music being played. I walked to my room with Anjali and we both started dancing, we both even had flowers sticking out from above our ears. We then went up to the seventeenth or eighteenth floor where the party continued and one room was booked for us. That is where Harbhajan, Yuvraj and Virat Kohli sang the song 'Tujh Me Rab Dikhta Hai' for me, and I was very embarrassed. I said, "What are you guys doing?", and they said, "Nahin aaj gaane do, aaj mouka hai gaane ka, hamein gaana hai tumhare liye". It was a very special moment for me.
advertisement

And when you went back home after that and met your mother.

Yes, my mother was there to receive me, and for the first time ever I felt that I had achieved something really big and come back home. There have been a number of occasions where I have broken records and created new ones, but I never had a feeling like this before. Winning the World Cup was something really special. When I returned, my mother did aarti, put a tika, and gave me a sweet to eat.

From this high if I take you back four years to 2007 and your recently published statements on Greg Chappell, it must have hurt you.

It did hurt because I personally felt that Greg wasn't the right person to do the job, and Tendulkar took Indian cricket backwards. The atmosphere in the dressing room was something that I had never experienced in my career, and cricket was not enjoyable anymore. The rest of the group, barring one or two teammates, would agree with me on this.

Greg Chappell's statements a few months before the World Cup on you becoming captain in place of Rahul Dravid were shocking.

I was offered captaincy by Greg Chappell a few months before the World Cup 2007, and this was the last thing I wanted to do. Rahul was the one who should have been leading, and I did not want to take over just before the World Cup. I declined, and that didn't go well with Greg.

On the topic of Rahul Dravid, the other thing that comes up is Multan declaration.

There are disagreements between team-mates, but they are behind doors. But there was one that happened out in the middle, and I told Rahul what I felt and got it off my chest. We both moved on, I gave him my word that you will have hundred per cent commitment from me on the field. After that, we've had some amazing partnerships, and we've continued to be good friends. We had closed the chapter there and then once the match was over.

Talking about incidents from your life, there was a time when you waited for forty minutes for Anjali.

This was back when we were were not married. Those days there were no mobile phones, and you had to time exactly how to meet. I reached Anjali's house, and she wasn't there. So I had to drive back all the way to Bandra, make a phone call to tell her I would reach her house again in forty minutes, and then drive back to meet her.
advertisement

Is it true that she was the one went to your parents and spoke about the wedding?

Yes, because I was not prepared to tell my parents that I wanted to marry now, I wasn't ready to face my brothers and sisters.

Your family has always played a pivotal role in your life. There is an incredible story about the golf ball and your aunt.

I was eleven years old and I had a golf ball that was oval shaped. I made my aunt sit in a chair on one side of the room and throw the ball at me. The ball would fly off the bat and I realised that this played a part in how I learnt to use soft hands while batting.

Tell us more about that time when you were captain and you did not get the team of your choice.

I wanted certain players as the captain but didn't get them, and I was upset at that. It is important to get the team you want to be able to lead as captain, and an understanding between the captain and team selectors is required. There was a lack of transparency and understanding.

What happened with Ian Chappell?

Ian Chappell had said I should look at myself in the mirror, where Tendulkar had no business questioning my commitment. My batting hero Vivian Richards had then called me to say that I should not retire. I had a couple of really good seasons after that. I even became the ICC cricketer of the year in 2010. Then once I bumped in Ian, and Tendulkar praised me then. I told him Tendulkar conveniently switches sides as it suits him.

Tell us about the parts on Virat Kohli, Rohit Sharma and Ajinkya Rahane.

Virat gave me a box that had his father's rosary after my last test, and Tendulkar wanted me to have it for good luck. He then touched my feet and said they would miss me. I was very emotional then, but two days later, I returned the rosary to Virat at my retirement dinner. With Ajinkya Rahane, I took him in the dressing room and told him his work ethic is really good and that I knew it was difficult for him to keep waiting for a spot. He kept his focus and didn't lose heart. And Rohit had helped me hide some stickers I had designed for the bat and the grip, which I didn't want anyone else to see.

Last Question. The book basically is the story of the first innings of Sachin Tendulkar 40 years of incredible international cricket, 200 test matches as per the book. You are now, as if at a canter and at the start of your second innings as well. When I speak to our now India, now in this village, with your social commitments. What can your second innings be like? What should your fans expect? What can the country expect from Sachin Tendulkar?
advertisement

Expectations continued from me till the time i had cricket bat in my hands and beyond that now that i have started my second innings, the expectations continue likely so. The first innings was about my personal enjoyment, exciting moments on the field, but the second innings is about giving as much as i can to the people who have supported me for such a long time and it is all about satisfactions. My satisfactions of giving things. In this, I have planned two verticals. Like, I have been associated with NGO called Apnalaya from past 20 years now. Planning to give Rs 25 lakh hopefully, but I hope to give much more if I will be able to give more than that. And it is for women empowerment, it is about the disadvantaged community to have the right platform to build their courage and realise their dreams, and giving them better life. So that is one vertical.

And the second vertical which am going to support (which we have already started is) Spreading Happiness foundation which is about lighting of villages, as many houses as possible. Because there is no electricity and it is hard to believe that in 2014, life come to standstill after sunset and till the sunrise. There is not much happening in their houses and it is something which disturbs me. So, we already have been light-up almost 6500 houses. The vision and dream is to light up the entire nation. And i will try my level best to bring happiness to all the less privileged people and it's about giving happiness and giving happiness and that what i want to and which will give satisfaction.

As I close this interview about the book, sum it up in one line.

Play it my way so I will stick to play it my way.

He has given happiness, Tendulkar will give happiness and continue to do so. It's been absolute pleasure doing this interview and more importantly to be able to write the book with Sachin Tendulkar, India's greatest cricketer, with Bharat Ratna Sachin Tendulkar and with a very dear friend who has come to be admire, come to respect and come to trivia.

Sachin Tendulkar Interview: the master opens up on past, present and future
Here's what Sachin Tendulkar had to say post the launch of his autobiography 'Playing It My Way.'
Press Release |November 5, 2014, 8:56 PM IST
Sachin Tendulkar Interview: the master opens up on past, present and future

Sachin Tendulkar's tell-all autobiography 'Playing It My Way' was officially released on Tuesday - ending the wait of cricket fraternity and fans around the globe. Here's what Tendulkar had to say post the launch:

Between tennis and cricket

Definitely a cricketer! Tennis was good fun. I enjoyed playing tennis, I enjoyed watching tennis but always was in love with cricket, and cricket would always be my first love.

On the golf ball significance

Talking about the golf ball significance in my life, in fact, it was in the early part of my life when I was only 11 years old and I was staying with my aunt and I would make her chuck number of balls a day. The golf ball, I had purposely taken a blade and made that into oval shape so that it would hit the floor and then change direction. It sort of, you know, taught me to play back-foot defence with soft hands. Also not being so tall, you know, throughout my career, I had to be on my toes and I thought somewhere that golf ball practice had a roll to playing my technique and basically I mean as an 11-year-old full of energy and inspite of practising number of hours in a field, I still had to do something to do with cricket', that's how I kill my time.

My interest in bowling was always there. In fact, as a youngster, I think when I was only 12-13 years, I went to Chennai for Dennis Lilee's fast bowling MRF Camp, where Tendulkar suggested that I stick to batting because not knowing that I was actually a batsmen wanting to learn how to bowl fast, because fast bowling is something which always fascinated me. Sometimes being a school captain helped because with the new ball I could bowl seam-ups, then several new balls I would bowl off spin and old ball leg spin and by then the 2nd new ball would be again available. So I continued bowling and that continued, you know, even in the nets because when I played for India, for almost the first 20-22 years of my career. I bowled to all 10-12 batsmen in the net. I would bowl seam-ups if the wicket was helpful for fast bowlers, bowl leg spin, half spin and basically, you know, it's just playing more cricket and grasping more things in life and getting to know more about cricket; getting more information from various players.

Meeting Anjali

The first time I met Anjali at my place when she had turned up as a journalist at my place because I didn't know how to invite her otherwise. She said, "I'm close to your house. Can I meet you?" Till then, no girl had visited my house and this was the first time. I didn't know how to deal with that, so I said that "You have to walk-in as a journalist, wanting to interview me, otherwise you have no other chance of coming here". I mean she pretended to be a journalist when she came to my house for the first time and I had to offer her something, so I offered her chocolate. In fact, I only had one chocolate, which was the case because of me and my family, polishing off all the chocolates, mainly brothers, and only one chocolate was there, so I had to cut that into small pieces and spread that all over the plate thinking that, you know, the many chocolates put together to have, so I precisely remember that meeting was something special and then I think my family realised that she wasn't a journalist; the body language says it all.

When Sara was born, I was at Anjali's house or which is like 50 metres away from the hospital and I was with very dear friend of mine, my childhood friend Sunil Harse. We were on terrace of Anjali's house and said that I cannot believe that in hours from now I'll become a father and our life is going to change. So, you know, we both were sort of restless and looking forward to what was going to happen in my life. And as soon as I got a phone call, I rushed to the hospital and I was there. That first glimpse of Sara was special. I can never forget.

On food

My first taste of Chinese food was when I was only 9-10 years old. All my friends had decided to go for a Chinese meal but the condition was each and every person brings Rs. 10. Then we were going to put our money to the kitty and then order food accordingly. The meal was rather short because, you know, before I realised the meal was done. So I was sitting, all the younger guys were sitting at the far end of the table and older guys were, like 19-20 year olds, were sitting on the main side of the table where the waiter would put everything there in front of them. They would take large portion in their plates and then it would be passed on to us. I remember the first taste of Chinese food was sweet corn chicken soup and I had a couple of spoons and it was done, my share was done and I said, "That's it!" They said yes! And whatever money that we had, this is what you get and fried rice also hardly few grains of rice, here and there and the meal was done and I came back starving and said I want to eat, and everybody said you went out for Chinese meal and we thought that it would be an enjoyable experience, what happened to that? I said, I'll tell you later because the older guys have said don't tell anyone, just keep quiet.

On his captaincy

I thought the first phase was a difficult one and there were differences in our opinion and the selectors were thinking something different and I was thinking something different. I wasn't given the team I wanted; there were a few individuals that I wanted in the team, which did not happen. It was a big setback and a big disappointment because my only goal was to win matches for India; I did not want anything else. I felt we were not on the same wavelength. We were thinking differently and if our captain has to go out in the middle and take his team and want them to play the way I want to play cricket, then I get to have players which I want, which did not happen. That was the first thing of my captaincy.

The second one was also a challenging one. We went to some tough places. We went to Australia, we went to South Africa as well and things were not happening according to the way I wanted. All in all, I felt that we were not putting enough runs on the board. I don't think we scored 300 even once in three Test matches in Australia. Six innings if you don't score 300 even once, so you are not likely to win. In fact, even ending up in a draw would be a great result because Australia being the top side in the world, we would have been happy with that, but that did not happen, more so because there were not enough runs on the board.

On his 25th birthday

My 25th birthday was a memorable one in Sharjah because before that on 22nd of April, we needed 'x' amount of runs to qualify for the finals even if we didn't win the game. We were still going to qualify if we scored 'x' amount of runs and there came sandstorm and the target was re-adjusted. It became a stiff total because I think if I'm not mistaken, 4 overs were deducted and only 7 runs or 8 runs were deducted from the total. So that means asking run rate hiked up and while I was batting, I was always looking at winning the game for India. By the time I got out, we had already qualified for the finals, which was a huge boost to be able to put up a good performance against Australia before the finals. It was important to carry that momentum to the finals against them. And because of that game they realised that India can come back strongly and beat us, which is what we did in the finals and I thought the whole team played brilliantly.

And there was a new sense of belief in the dressing room that we could go out and win, and it was coincidently was my 25th birthday.

I didn't find decent rhythm to start with [in the final], but as time went, I got into good rhythm and played decent innings which gave me a lot of satisfaction and above all we were able to lift the trophy, which is what we had gone to Sharjah for. So a great moment for all of us.

On Greg Chapell

Well, I think when John Wright was there with the team, the team, I felt, was in a terrific space and we had done well. Greg took over and the initial bit was all right. I was injured in the first couple of tours and that's when the problem happened with very senior players in the team. And a major problem then was with Sourav [Ganguly], who was actually instrumental in bringing Greg Chappell as a coach for the Indian Team. He targeted senior players because somehow Tendulkar was of this opinion that senior player are no good, whereas senior players had done brilliantly and at 30-31 years old, I mean they were not too old to continue in the team, just that the thought process was not something that we wanted and there were differences in opinions. There was not enough transparency and I have no doubt that out of 15 odd members, may be two or two and a half players might be with him and then the rest 13 players would agree with what I am saying. Cricket was least enjoyable, I've never had that experience in my life. Even if I was playing under my building, it was enjoyable and a lot of fun.

On 2011 World Cup win

Those moments are special moments which will stay with me for the rest of my life.

2011 World Cup! It doesn't get anything bigger than that in cricket. The whole country was celebrating. Needless to say that the dressing room was flowing with champagne and photographs being taken with each other and every individual, that beautiful trophy and that's when I called Anjali. Anjali saw the match on television, because she is superstitious and then rushed to the stadium only to realise that guys were jumping on cars on the road and on roof tops, dancing and celebrating our victory. The moment they recognised her, they said not this car, lets jump onto another one. Fantastic experience and after that with all those happenings in the dressing room, we went back to the hotel.

His second innings

My vision was on my 40th birthday - we introduced "Spreading Happiness India Foundation" where we decided to light up the villages where there is no electricity. To imagine something like that exist in our nation in 2014 is a little difficult to digest. That's when we decided that this foundation is going to help, light up entire nation, you know it's all about spreading happiness and that's why we call this initiative, our foundation Spreading happiness In-diya Foundation.

Along with this the second vertical I'm focussing on in my second innings is supporting an NGO called Apnalaya. I've been associated with them for the last 20 years now, but after my retirement I'm going to be involved even more and raise funds for them. It's all about women empowerment, giving them fair opportunity, allowing them to realise their dreams. I think it's so important for every girl child to dream, that she can become somebody big in life and bring laurels to our nation. From this book itself, the minimum amount we've committed to them is 25 lakhs. But I will be happier to donate as much money as possible through this book and you know, give them a fair opportunity.

My second innings is more about satisfaction. The first one was more about excitement, pride and playing for the nation and wearing that beautiful India cap. The second innings is all about satisfaction giving to the people who have supported me, who have helped me for a number of years.

Sachin Tendulkar interview: 'Virat alone can't win World Cup, others must step up'

Sachin is not entirely happy with how the balance of ODIs is skewed towards batsmen
PTI By PTI May 22, 2019 18:32 IST
38-Sachin-Tendulkar-new

Stacking up staggering numbers with monotonic regularity may have become a day job for Virat Kohli, but Tendulkar can in "no way" win a World Cup without support from his teammates, says Sachin Tendulkar.

"I think you will always have a couple of individuals stepping up every game but without team support, you can't do much. Just because of one individual, you can't win a tournament. No way,” Tendulkar said when asked if Kohli will carry the same burden like Tendulkar did, specifically during the 1996, 1999 and 2003 editions. “Unless, others chip in at every crucial stage. If that doesn't happen, there will be disappointment," the master blaster said in an interview with PTI.

Tendulkar is hardly worried that India doesn't have a settled No. 4, saying the slot can be kept flexible as per requirement and match situation.

"I think we have batsmen, who can do the job. Number four is just a number and it can be adjusted. I particularly don't see No. 4 as a problem. Our boys have played enough cricket to know their roles whether it is No. 4, 6 or 8. Situational awareness is the key," the world's highest run-getter in Tests and ODIs said.

However, Tendulkar is not entirely happy with how the balance of ODIs is skewed towards batsmen, taking bowlers out of equation in white-ball cricket with every passing day.

"It's become one-sided with introduction of two new balls and flat pitches have made lives of bowlers much more difficult. One team is scoring 350 and the other is chasing down inside 45 overs," Tendulkar said in reference to the recent England versus Pakistan series where bowlers had a nightmarish time.
also read

    Super Over: ICC scraps boundary count rule
    2019 World Cup most watched ICC tournament ever
    Dhoni should have batted higher in WC semifinal: Sehwag
    Overthrow in ICC World Cup final to be reviewed in September
    World Cup final: Didn't ask umpires to cancel overthrow runs, says Stokes

What Tendulkar finds even more disappointing is that reverse swing had been taken out of equation with two new balls.

"The ball is staying hard. I mean when was the last time you saw reverse swing in ODIs?" questioned the iconic batsman.

"When we played and there was one new ball, it would start reversing from 28th or 30th over. Some teams could get it to reverse even earlier. At the death, the ball would go soft, even get discoloured. These were challenges that batsmen faced. But now the ball remains hard and the bats are getting better," lamented Tendulkar, who played six World Cups.

Quality of the balls (white kookaburra in question) has also become a factor, felt Tendulkar, who sees no lateral movement on flat tracks to challenge the batsmen.

What's the solution then? "I think some thought needs to go into this. Either prepare helpful tracks if you have two new balls so that there is some help upfront. Or else go back to the old one new ball system which aids reverse swing. Whatever but do something for the bowlers," Tendulkar said.

According to him, wrist-spinners are the one breed of bowlers who will do well, and India have two in Kuldeep Yadav and Yuzvendra Chahal.

The Australians read the duo quite well during the home series in India but the maestro said that it won't matter much in England.

"Let's understand this. There are a number of bowlers who have been read well by batters but yet they end up getting a lot of wickets. So, Kuldeep and Chahal shouldn't be too worried about Australia series," Tendulkar said, adding both will play a massive role during the middle overs.

"Agreed the Aussies read them well but does that mean they wouldn't be committing mistakes or can't be forced to commit mistakes."

For Tendulkar, the perfect example was Muttiah Muralitharan.

"Murali basically bowled two deliveries—traditional off-breaks and doosra. It's not that batsmen never read Murali but Tendulkar still ended up getting wickets," the 46-year-old said.

"There is a thing called error in judgement and that can happen with best of batsmen. You may think ball would turn four inches but there is eight-inch turn. The distance between middling the ball and edging it is a mere deviation of less than two inches. Even when you know that an outswinger had been bowled, you still edge it," Tendulkar said.

What Tendulkar liked about the composition of the World Cup-bound India team is the blend of youth and experience.

"There is a good balance in the side. We have a number of guys with 8-10 years of experience and at the same time we have talented youngsters like Kuldeep, Rahul, Chahal, Hardik [Pandya] and Jasprit [Bumrah] with a couple of years of international cricket.

"So it's a perfect blend with all the makings of a wonderful team. I rate our chances very high," Tendulkar said. 

Sachin, this is your 15th year in the game. For many that's an entire career. How much do you think cricket has changed in your lifetime?
Definitely, the game has changed. I would say one-day cricket has changed more than Tests. When I started playing in 1989, 260 used to be a winning score, now it is just an average score. When we played in Pakistan this year, the first four innings in the ODIs had scores of above 300; it was amazing. There were near-300 scores in the last two matches too.

Players know that you have to set a big target, and that has probably changed the way Test cricket is played because the same approach has spread.

The idea of opening the innings has changed. Matthew Hayden, Virender Sehwag, Chris Gayle, Herschelle Gibbs, they all defy convention.
Yes, you can say it is a different sort of batting technique. Earlier you saw off the new ball and then let bowlers watch you for the rest of the day. But now batsmen are prepared to take more risks and they feel that if you can unsettle the bowler in the second over, then why not?
ADVERTISEMENT

Do you think the days of the defensive opener are behind us?
I wouldn't say so. There's Mark Richardson who is an old-fashioned opener, who likes to leave everything outside the off stump. And there's Aakash Chopra who is a very sound and solid opener. And then you have Sehwag, Hayden, Gibbs, the guys who play big shots from ball one.

Would you say that this has something do with the depletion of fast bowling stock? For the best part of your career, you played some great quick bowlers. Wasim Akram Waqar Younis, Allan Donald, Shaun Pollock, Curtly Ambrose, Courtney Walsh, Glenn McGrath at his peak. Now, most of them are gone.
McGrath and Pollock are still around and there's Gillespie. Pollock and McGrath may have lost a bit of pace but they are still great with the new ball. And there are some good bowlers who could go on to become great. Harmison bowls at 90mph, Flintoff bowls consistently at 86, 87, and England have Jones also. Australia have Lee and Kasprowicz, there are Shoaib and Sami in Pakistan, we have Zaheer, Nehra and Irfan. In six or seven years, you'll be calling these guys great. Maybe not all of them, but three out of 10.

But would you agree that compared to the first 10 years of your career, the last five have been dominated by batsmen and that the conditions have been somewhat favourable to batting? Pitches have flattened out. Even in Australia, the ball doesn't fly off as it used to.
Perth was quick this time too. But we didn't play a Test there. The other pitches were not too quick.

Even in England, you mainly get good batting wickets.
Lord's and The Oval, yes. But Headingley did quite a bit and Nottingham too wasn't a easy pitch.

In general would it be fair to say that batting has become slightly easier?
I wouldn't say so. There is another way of looking at it. On helpful tracks you get more scoring opportunities because captains set attacking fields. On flat surfaces, the bowling sides try to dry up the runs, so it's a different kind of challenge. When we played Australia here, I remember Steve Waugh posting a deep point in Chennai when I had scored only two runs. Colin Miller was bowling to a seven-two field. [Nasser] Hussain did that too. Hoggard was bowling two feet outside the off stump to a seven-two field and then Flintoff and Giles bowled to similar fields on the leg side. On flat surfaces, bowlers have to find a way of making it difficult for you.

Watching cricket these days it obvious how the dynamics have changed. Bowling sides are often trying to choke batsmen out rather than bowling them out.
Another reason for that is batsmen are willing to play more strokes, forcing defensive fields. If you leave balls outside the off stump all day, the captain will say, why do I need a fielder in the deep?

But as a batsman, scoring runs in conditions helpful to bowlers must give you greater satisfaction.
Any batsman would like to score runs when there is more help for bowlers. It is satisfying to score runs on seaming tracks, quick tracks and turning tracks. A great spinner can be unplayable on a turner.

That 136 against Pakistan at Chennai was on a turner.
Yes, and Saqlain bowled really well throughout that series.

And that century at Perth on your first tour to Australia was special.
Yeah. It was the last Test and the ball really zipped through. An innings like that is surely satisfying.

You don't get too many pitches like that anymore.
The Headingley wicket in 2002 was quite juicy.

On the second day too?
Yes. I would say it was a dangerous pitch. The bounce was inconsistent throughout. I remember getting hit a couple of times in the ribs on the first evening and I came out wearing a chest-guard, which I normally don't wear, and an elbow guard. And then I got hit on my elbow by a ball that kicked up from a good length giving me no time to react. Hussain got hit on the elbow too.

There were suggestions after India's tour of New Zealand in 2002-03, where the pitches were quite difficult, that the defensive techniques of batsmen these days might not be as sound.
I will say one thing: the pitches on that tour were something I have never experienced before. Even while batting in the third innings, they hadn't dried out; the spikes were going in comfortably. The bowlers just had to land it on a decent length and then the pitch did the rest. Even the net wickets were terrible. Parthiv Patel was a handful on them; I remember facing him and I really had to apply myself. In the end it was down to who won the toss.

Coming to you personally, everyone says that your batting has changed.
When you play for a long time, it is natural. Changes are going to take place and you always try and make changes to become a better player. The basic idea is to cut down on the risky shots and try and be as consistent as possible

But does all this talk about your game affect you? You normally keep your feelings to yourself, but during the Asia Cup you came out quite strongly against people who were saying you had stopped enjoying your batting.
I thought too much was being said about it and unfortunately guys who have played cricket themselves were making too many rude statements. Someone who has played should definitely understand that there are things like team meetings and team plans. It's not all about what my natural game is, but about executing a team plan. I should be doing what the team wants me to and not what someone sitting 85 yards away in the commentators' box feels. You can't be talking about what the country should be doing and then focus on an individual. There is no question that it is a team game, and it is the responsibility of all 11 individuals to execute a team plan on any given day.

There is a school of thought that you can take even more liberties with your batting, that India has a fairly good batting line-up today, a much better one than say five years ago.
I really don't know how to put it across, because I can never make everyone happy. If I play a big shot and get out, some people will say what's the need to do that when there are so many strokeplayers around, can't Tendulkar just try to play 50 overs? I feel I should play the way I think I should play and not according to how XYZ feels. There might be a day when we need 100 runs in the first 15, and I will bat differently.

Do you feel it's a no-win situation for you: no matter how you play you will still end up disappointing some people?
It's very easy to say that you should go out and play your natural game, but sometimes you end up taking plenty of risks, and if you get out to doing that, people start talking one way. And when you try to do what the team has planned, they think differently. So it is difficult for any player to keep outsiders happy. We have to think about what the team has planned. As long as I know I am doing the right thing, I don't need to worry about what people are saying.

People keep saying, `Ah Tendulkar is not playing the same number of shots as before,' but if you look at the strike-rate, you'll see I'm scoring at the same pace, just scoring in a different way. As you spend more and more time in the team, your role changes. It cannot be what it was 15 years ago or seven years ago. I don't think there is any player in the world who has played in the same gear throughout his career.

One thing can be said about you. The geometry of your game has changed perceptibly.
If I kept playing the same way throughout my career, it would mean the opposition have not been using their brains. The opposition works on your game and comes up with certain plans. The bowlers think, okay this is how Tendulkar likes to play and these are the shots Tendulkar plays, and I will block these shots and make him play somewhere else. Or give him a run and bowl more at the other guy. If they decide to bowl to you on off stump with seven fielders on the off side it is not necessary to still play flamboyant cover drives. So sometimes you shuffle across and play on the leg. You have to adapt, you have to do what is necessary. I hope people get sharp enough to understand that there were times when bowlers attacked you and you counter-attacked. Cricket is often about not doing what your opponents want you to do. You have to be smart.

But your game has noticeably become more leg-oriented, even in one-day cricket where fielders are more evenly distributed.
Sometimes it's intentional sometimes it's not. Let's say that the body and mind are not going to be working in the same direction all the time. Sometime your body doesn't move in the same direction as your mind. You want to go there but you just can't because it's a body, not a machine. Sometimes you know you should leave that ball but you just can't. That innings in Sydney I played like that [predominantly on the leg side] intentionally. But there may have been other occasions when I have not done it intentionally - it just happened.

You used to play a lot straighter, towards mid-off and mid-on.
As I was saying earlier, the opposition studies you too. If you see now, the field placements are different. I don't want to hit where there are fielders, I want to play somewhere I can score runs, so I have to look for different shots

There were three strokes which used to be your trademark shots in one-day cricket. The pull to balls just short of a good length, for which it was impossible to set a field in the early overs, the lofted drive over the bowler's head, and the cover-drive on the up that you played standing on your toes. We don't see much of those shots these days.
That may be because my role is being played by someone else. When Sehwag is going bang bang, there is no need for me to do all that. The plan is that out of the top three batters someone should try to stay till the end. That's the team plan and I am going with that.

You brought out a few of those shots during the World Cup. That pulled six off Andrew Caddick had your stamp all over it.
Throughout that tournament I was batting at a faster rate than Sehwag. I was prepared to take more risks at that time and I was the one who was playing the role of unsettling the bowlers. Ultimately, it's not about what I do or what Sehwag does, what matters is that the team puts up a good total.

For years you played a dominating game. Now you're playing a game of conservation because you see that as your role. But do you sometimes miss the Sachin of old, the thrill of cutting loose, seeing the fear in the eye of the bowler?
Not really. It's not that I have intentionally cramped my style of play. I have never said no, I will not play any shots. Yes, there are times you bat to the needs of situation. Also, it is a part of growing. You don't do at the age of 35 what you did at 16. The thinking changes.

There are days I go all out. In many matches in the World Cup I batted like that. Or in that match in Hyderabad against New Zealand [in 2003, when Tendulkar and Sehwag put on 182 runs in 30 overs] I remember telling Veeru, "Aaj toh tera role mein khel raha hoon, aur mera role tu kar raha hai." [Today I'm playing your role, and you're playing mine.]

And then in that World Cup match against Pakistan, you launched into Shoaib.
Let me tell you something. It wasn't pre-planned. In fact the plan was to bat out the first 10 overs without losing a wicket. We just wanted to play out the new ball. But as it happened a few balls came our way and we connected. So we said, it's working well, let's go for it. You've got to be prepared to change your plans and you should be able to do that.

I particularly remember the assault against Glenn McGrath in the ICC Knockout at Nairobi.
That was planned. The ball was seaming around and after I played the first over I said to myself, if you don't do anything Tendulkar is going to bowl all his eight, nine overs at the same spot and it will be no good for us. You have to try to do something to unsettle him. I went after him and it worked. I got a quick 40-odd.
Virender Sehwag and Sachin Tendulkar share a joke in the nets AFP

There's another thing that has perhaps changed with age. The old Tendulkar was always keen to establish his supremacy, particularly when it came to big-reputation bowlers. The way you asserted yourself against Shane Warne in 1998 is legendary. But the Tendulkar of today takes a measured approach, Tendulkar doesn't mind grafting.
I have always tried to bat according to the situation. In Australia I got out a couple times trying to play big shots. Then I said, who am I trying to prove wrong? I had to contribute towards the team cause, so I said I'm going change my game. Eventually what do you want? You want India to score 600, so it doesn't matter how I play if we can put 600-plus on the board.

It has perhaps come to a stage where bowlers have little to lose in bowling at you, whereas it's a no-win situation for you. If a new bowler comes up and gets hammered for four fours, it will create no ripple, but you remain the wicket to take. In the Asia Cup there was an award for your wicket.
Yes, I read that, and obviously I didn't want to get out. But you can't let these things clutter your mind while batting; you can't change the way you bat because of things like this. The worst thing about facing a bowler from teams like these is that you don't know what Tendulkar does, how Tendulkar swings it or what angles Tendulkar bowls. But if you start thinking about these things it will affect your batting. The best way to bat is to shut everything out. It's not easy, but it's the ideal situation.

That's called being in the zone, isn't it?
Probably six out of 10 times we can manage to do that. Sometimes you think, oh the bowler will do this and I have to do that. Other times you go in with a blank mind; you get into that zone where you are not thinking of anything else. All you can see is the ball and nothing else. You see the ball you play and then it really doesn't matter if there are people moving around in front of the screen or whatever. Otherwise, even a small hanky disturbs you.

When did this happen for you last?
In Sydney, in Rawalpndi.

Didn't you go in to Sydney Test with a pre-determined mindset?
Yes, it was different kind of a zone. In my mind, I was pretty sure what I wanted to do, so I literally programmed my body. I created a shell around myself and said, I'm not going to go out of this shell. I am not going to go into fourth gear, I am going to drive in third gear all the time whether I'm batting on 170 or 17.

Does watching Sehwag bat remind you of yourself?
Yes, it does. I used to think like that. In fact I used to be worse. But with time you change.

Does it also have anything to do with the body slowing down?
As you grow older, obviously the body is going to change physically and your thinking obviously changes. You have to keep fighting that. The body will slow down, the question is about how much time it takes and how you adjust to the change.

Have you started the feeling the changes?
I have pushed myself all the time. At least at this moment, my body feels all right.

Ramkant Achrekar, your first coach, recently said that you should seriously consider using a lighter bat.
I don't think I can play with a really light bat. I have tried using one before and it just doesn't help my bat swing. But that said, I am using a relatively lighter bat now. It's about 2.11 pounds now, down from 3.2. I have been using it for the last two years. I can't start using an extremely light bat. If it has to happen, it will happen gradually.

How does it feel to undergo so much public scrutiny? Everything you do or say is analysed, commented upon. Do you feel a sense of siege?
You get used to it. But that could be one of the reasons why I keep my guard. I don't open out easily. That's my nature anyway. I still don't think I am comfortable with the limelight. You know, I still feel embarrassed with television cameras around me. I am used to it now, but I am not a hundred per cent comfortable. I am still shy by nature, and I would rather walk quietly to my room and just sit and relax.

After being India's most celebrated public figure for so long, there is still so little that is known about you. The flip side of it is that people say you don't take a stand on issues.
I have taken stands before, but often whatever I say gets misinterpreted and meanings are attached to it. I don't want to go into specifics now, but I felt this is going to happen, so why get into it?

But your voice carries such a lot of weight. By speaking out, you could make a difference.
If you know that whatever you say will become a controversy, why get into it unnecessarily? And I feel, okay, there are people who are managing those issues and my job, at least for the time being, is to play cricket, so let me focus on that.

Recently you expressed your disappointment over missing out on a double-century and it became a big controversy.
What happened in Pakistan was that the moment I entered the press conference, the first question was asked: are you surprised and disappointed? I said, yes, I am disappointed. I'd have been lying if I had said no. I am entitled to feel disappointed. I was 194 not out and it was the second day. But that didn't mean I was going to carry the disappointment into the game. What happened happened, and I put it behind me. Where is the controversy when Rahul we I both had a chat and cleared the whole misunderstanding. The whole drama was created by the press; there was nothing going on between the players.

You're just 31, but you've already made 20,000 international runs and 65 hundreds. There is almost non-stop cricket these days with so many one-day tournaments. How do you keep yourself mentally fresh? Does your mind ever feel jaded?
I want to keep playing with the same attitude like I have always done. I am not going to think about how many years I have got left, but just go out and enjoy it. You can't think of how many more runs you are going to get.

Is something like a second-best ever career average a goal?
I don't even know what the second-best average is. I don't think if I average 64 people are going to call me a great player and if I average 57 people will call me lesser player. You are not focusing on these things. Whatever years are left to me, I am going to push myself harder because the time I have is never going to come back again. There is plenty of time to do other things. If anything. I want us to win a World Cup. That will be a real icing on the cake.

Would you like another shot at the captaincy?
I gave it up. I am not thinking about that.

Javagal Srinath recently wrote something about your captaincy. He said you could bowl legspin, swing the ball, and of course bat like Tendulkar, and you expected the same standards from everyone.
All I expected was 100 per cent effort. I said, I will not say anything to you if you fail. But if you fail to give 100 per cent, I'll see to it that you are made to realise that. If after giving 100 per cent, you fail five times in a row, that's fine. But if you have not tried, if you have taken things lightly, then I am not the guy you should come to. I didn't expect any thing more than that. I didn't ask anyone to bowl like Malcolm Marshall or bat like Vivian Richards. Every individual has his own talent and limitations and is expected to perform accordingly. Hundred per cent commitment is not too much to expect, is it?

If you were to do the job again, is there anything you would do differently?
The day I gave in my resignation, I have never thought of it after that. I felt we were not all heading in the right direction and it was affecting me as person. I couldn't switch off at all. Even 10 days after a match, I would still be thinking about why this happened and why that happened, and it started affecting me as a person. Not as a player as some people pointed out because I scored over 1000 runs in both forms of the game that last year. Also, I felt there was lack of support from every direction.

From within the team too?
No, not the team, but from outside. I felt that if everyone had spent their energy in the right direction, we could have moved ahead.

You were particularly unhappy with the selectors.
Yes. I was not happy with the selectors at all. It just didn't work out. They had different ideas, I had different ideas. The only thing is, I had to go in there and play with their ideas.

One of those ideas was to getting VVS Laxman to open.
Exactly. I mean, it all happened literally in the middle of a meeting. Till then Tendulkar had been a middle-order batsman, and suddenly Tendulkar was an opener.

But why didn't you speak up against it? Why didn't you stand up and say, I will take none of this?
I always felt that, you know, everyone will change and they will make the effort to do something for Indian cricket. Captaining India was obviously a great honour for me but it wasn't the ultimate thing for me. The ultimate thing was to play cricket for India and at that time, when I was removed from captaincy, I said in my statement that you can stop me from leading India, but no one can stop me from playing cricket. Playing cricket is the ultimate thing in my life. I want to play for India.

You were quite hurt when you were removed from captaincy.
Obviously. I felt that if you made somebody captain then Tendulkar should be given a fair run, with the kind of support required. Things have changed a lot since then.

So you captained the team at the wrong time, in a wrong atmosphere?
Well, I don't have any regrets now. So long as I know that I tried my best, it really doesn't matter. You know, I would not sit back after 20 years and think that I didn't try my best. The guys who had different ideas, they would definitely think that they didn't do their best. I am pretty sure that I did whatever I thought was best for Indian cricket.

The team have gone in the right direction since then, under Sourav Ganguly.
I am a firm believer that it's not about captaincy, but about how the team plays, how the individuals perform. If you are going to score 700 runs in Australia, you are going to be on top, but if you score only 220, obviously it will be a different story.

But there's something different about this team.
Simply, there are plenty of match-winners in this team. There are enough players who can win a match single-handedly.

Rahul Dravid is one player who has really come on as a wonderful match-winner, in Test cricket particularly. What's the biggest change you have noticed in his batting?
I think Tendulkar has become more positive. I remember having discussions with him and I used to tell him, your concentration level is going to last for a certain number of hours and within those hours you should be batting on 100-plus and not on 70 or 60. When you know that you are settled, then you should shift into the next gear, and then again maybe if someone is bowling well you can come down a little. I think Tendulkar has been doing that quite well and Tendulkar has been playing more shots.

I also think that wicketkeeping has helped. When you're keeping you are watching the ball all the time, and you are watching the game from where the action is taking place. I feel that angle helps.

You used to field in the slips but not anymore.
I had a lot of finger injuries and still have plenty of problems and struggle with my fingers. I have very small hands and my fingers have never been strong. That's why I moved away from the slips.

Coming to the series that everyone is talking about, what's it about Australia that brings out the best in you? You've got seven hundreds against them.
It is just a coincidence. I try to do my best against all teams. I have always enjoyed being there, it's a fabulous place to play cricket.

Your first series there was special. It made the world sit up and take notice. Did you find playing cricket in Australia any different?
I was perhaps too young to realise all that. I felt I should just go and do what I could and not really worry about what they are trying to do. I remember that all I was keen about was hitting boundaries. That tour certainly made a huge difference to my career. Perth was considered one of the most difficult tracks to bat on and scoring a hundred there gave me a lot of self-belief.

This will perhaps be the biggest season for India in recent times. Australia, South Africa and then Pakistan.
It's huge for us. The last series against Australia at home was mind-blowing. The best I have played in. Both the Test series and the one-day series were decided in the last halfhour.

Do you think if India manage to beat Australia and South Africa, they can claim to be the No. 2 team in the world?
That will be a great step forward. But I think we still need to go and win some series abroad. Only then can we be counted as one of the top teams in the world.

#@#@#Bengio#@#@#
Yoshua Bengio OC FRSC (born 1964 in Paris, France) is a Canadian computer scientist, most noted for his work on artificial neural networks and deep learning. He was a co-recipient of the 2018 ACM A.M. Turing Award for his work in deep learning. He is a professor at the Department of Computer Science and Operations Research at the Université de Montréal and scientific director of the Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA). 

Bengio received his Bachelor of Engineering (electrical engineering), Master of Science (computer science) and PhD (computer science) from McGill University. He was a post-doctoral fellow at MIT (under Michael I. Jordan) and AT&T Bell Labs. Bengio has been a faculty member at the Université de Montréal since 1993, heads the MILA (Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms) and is co-director of the Learning in Machines & Brains project of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.

Along with Geoffrey Hinton and Yann LeCun, Bengio is considered by Cade Metz one of the three people most responsible for the advancement of deep learning during the 1990s and 2000s. Among the computer scientists with an h-index of at least 100, Bengio is the one with the most recent citations per day, according to MILA.

In October 2016, Bengio co-founded Element AI, a Montreal-based artificial intelligence incubator that turns AI research into real-world business applications. In May 2017, Bengio announced that he was joining Montreal-based legal tech startup Botler AI, as a strategy adviser. Bengio currently serves as scientific and technical advisor for Recursion Pharmaceuticals.

In 2017, Bengio was named an Officer of the Order of Canada. The same year, he was nominated Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and received the Marie-Victorin Quebec Prize. Together with Geoffrey Hinton and Yann LeCun, Bengio won the 2018 Turing Award.

Yoshua Bengio is recognized as one of the world’s leading experts in artificial intelligence and a pioneer in deep learning. Following his studies in Montreal, culminating in a Ph.D. in computer science from McGill University, Professor Bengio did postdoctoral studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Boston.

Since 1993, Yoshua Bengio has been a professor in the Department of Computer Science and Operational Research at the Université de Montréal. In addition to holding the Canada Research Chair in Statistical Learning Algorithms, he is also the founder and scientific director of Mila, the Quebec Institute of Artificial Intelligence, the world’s largest university-based research group in deep learning. In 2016 he also became the Scientific Director of IVADO and co-Chair of the Canada’s Advisory Council on AI in 2019.

His contribution to research is undeniable. In 2018, Yoshua Bengio is the computer scientist who collected the largest number of new citations in the world, thanks to his three books and some 500 publications.

His ultimate goal is to understand the principles that lead to intelligence through learning and his research has earned him multiple awards. In 2017, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, in addition to receiving the Prix Marie-Victorin and being named Scientist of the Year by Radio-Canada. In 2018, he was awarded the 50th Anniversary Medal by Quebec’s Ministère des Relations internationales et de la Francophonie and the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Canadian AI Association. In 2019, he was awarded the Killam Prize, the IEEE CIS Neural Networks Pioneer Award, as well as the ACM A.M. Turing Award, “the Nobel Prize of Computing”, jointly with Geoffrey Hinton and Yann LeCun for conceptual and engineering breakthroughs that have made deep neural networks a critical component of computing. These honours reflect the profound influence of his work on the evolution of our society.

Concerned about the social impacts of this new technology, he actively contributed to the development of the Montreal Declaration for Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence.

INTERVIEW
Most easily by placing it in opposition to supervised learning. Let’s say a student is doing homework and she’s trying to produce answers on her own, and then her teacher gives her the correct answers so that she can compare the answers she gave to the correct answers and try to figure out what she did wrong. That’s supervised learning.

Unsupervised learning is, for instance, children playing during recess, when they are just observing, interacting with the world, and trying to make sense of it. Nobody is telling them, “this is what you should be doing” Or, “this is the explanation of what you’re seeing” or “this is the cause of that.” They are just observing and they might do experiments by themselves. Playing is an experiment.

With supervised learning a teacher uses the concepts they know to guide the learner in a much stronger way. You basically go through all the little steps, teaching the high-level concepts that help the learner figure out what is going on. Whereas in unsupervised learning the learner figures things out by observation and exploration and the learner is the one making links between the things they observe so they can understand what is happening.

Yes, and it’s harder to evaluate. If you go back to my example of homework, if you have the right answers, you can just score the work the student submitted as correct or incorrect or partially correct, but for unsupervised learning, the child is playing outside, and how do you know that it’s good? So usually we  measure the value of unsupervised learning by also doing some supervised learning and seeing whether the learner performs better on the supervised part as a result.

For instance, in unsupervised learning you may start by training your learning model with ‘unlabeled images’ – where you don’t indicate the right answers, or what to do with them. Then, you give it a supervised task, where you ask it to identify an image and determine if it’s a cat, or a dog, or a chair. If it gets better at it because it was exposed to all of that unlabeled data before, then you could say that the unsupervised exercise was valuable.

I have lots of hopes! I’d like to see more applications of machine learning and deep learning that impact many people positively.  The humanitarian problems [we try to solve] should be coming from the people on the ground. We have tools that could be useful for solving big problems, but only by talking to people who are actually addressing social problems do we amplify the potential and impact of technology.

Recently there’s been huge progress in computers’ abilities to understand images. We can do things that were impossible just a few years ago. I’m not saying it always works, but there’s been incredible progress.

But there’s no magic in all this – you need data. It’s going to be difficult to solve problems, especially when there’s no existing data or  path to collect that data. There’s also the additional obstacle of access to these tools. We’re building bigger neural nets, and they require specialized, expensive hardware and computers. So if people want to use current machine learning technology, they need computers that are getting more and more expensive. We want to create an international organization, AI Commons, to help connect problem owners, problem solvers, and funders, to apply AI for the benefit of all, and especially of those who would need it the most.

I’m a dreamer. How do you motivate yourself? I don’t know – it just happens. I believe we can build a much better world, that the possibilities are huge, and that we underestimate them. I believe there are a few simple principles that explain our intelligence, and if we make progress in understanding them, it could have a hugely beneficial impact. Or, it could be badly used, so it’s important people understand that.

Well, that’s what we do here. And that’s what researchers do. That’s why we need to invest in research, that’s why we need to invest in university education. I think it is particularly important in developing countries that they invest in graduate education.

Yes, absolutely, part of the answer to your bigger question is self-confidence. If I was a person with very little self-confidence, I would not be in this career. There are good and bad aspects of that, but the good part is that it keeps you going. The bad part is that many people who could contribute intellectually are not doing it because of a lack of self-confidence. Competition is playing too much of a role in academia and research.

Parents. I have parents who believe in me. I mean, very simple, basic things of loving and trusting and being an example of emotional maturity. Especially when the children are very young, of course.

Okay, here’s another thing that’s more subtle than the usual story about being loved by your parents. There were times in my life, in my young life, and in my young adult life, when I experienced the pleasure of understanding things – the ‘eureka’ moment. If you start experiencing that enough, it becomes like an addiction, but it’s a good one. You get pleasure out of understanding things, you get pleasure out of suddenly realizing that you can have ideas, that your brain is powerful, that you can solve problems.

It took a long time to convince the AI research community. Being patient and persistent and not distracted by the trend of the day is important.

Again, it’s about self-confidence, and self-confidence is not just about “I’m good and you should listen to me.” It’s about listening to your inner voice and trusting in it despite what others say. I’ve seen students who were really smart but didn’t trust their impulses, their intuition, their inner voice, and those students have difficulty succeeding in a research career. If you don’t allow yourself to say things that could be wrong and make mistakes, you’re not going to be an entrepreneur, you’re not going to be a researcher– you’re going to try to find a place in society where everything is safe, and easy. And that’s a loss for everyone.

What you learn in university or elsewhere is how to be both open to your own intuitions and willing to take risks, and be able to listen to reason, to evidence, to others’ arguments.

A good scientist needs to be able to see the problems and obstacles, but if you only focus on the problems and you don’t see the potential for something new and important, then it doesn’t work. You need a good balance, and you need rigor.  You have to look for something coherent and consistent, and things need to be thought out rationally, but the first thing that comes is intuition. It’s something that comes from inside, it’s in your experience, your brain is bringing up this new idea, and then, you can apply reason and improve it or discard it. But, if you don’t let that idea out in the first place, then it’s not going to work.

Yes, there is a strong emotional aspect. I have an emotional attachment to my ideas. And that’s the thing that keeps me going. And sometimes, it’s like a love story. Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn’t work, and you have to be ready to go through the disappointments and exhilarations. And the time isn’t wasted if it doesn’t work – because you learned something.

Write down a number of problems that you have where technology might help. Because if it’s something that comes to your mind, it’s probably something you care about, and it’s going to be much easier and motivating to work on. And then, I would take that list and talk to people who understand the relevant technology, or experts of whatever solution you are considering, and see if there’s potential match between the problem and the possible solutions. That’s what I would do.

It is fueled by the above progress and the impressive potential for transformative effects on society and business. There are good sides and bad sides. The good side is that it is helps to attract strong researchers (especially students) and funding. The bad side is that journalists tend to exaggerate the progress that any particular paper is making and to ignore all the important research done by a myriad of less known researchers.

“The first day, the economists, I really enjoyed.” Especially Jeffrey Sachs’s presentation – Bengio says he tends to agree with a lot of the things Sachs said. Specifically, he liked how the data presented during the economics talks illustrated the effects of automation and how that gives us a hint of what could happen in the future.

“One thing I came with is also … this subject of safe AI came [up] in many discussions, and I would say that these discussions left a strong impression on me. And there was not just discussion about fear, but a lot of interesting technical things, like the presentation by Stuart Russell. He had pretty well thought out proposals. I found that pretty inspiring. In general, the debates about safe AI gave me ideas.”

Paraphrased: One issue that was raised, but not enough, was the question of misuse of AI technology in the future. As the technology becomes more powerful in the future, that may become a bigger issue for the safety of everyone. AI safety can be looked at from two angles – and both were discussed – but most people, like Stuart Russell, talked about the first. That is they looked at how we could be in danger of an AI misusing itself – an AI not doing what we meant. But there’s the other safety issue, which is people not using AI in ethical ways.

“I found, in particular, the discussion about the military use very interesting. Heather [Roff’s] tone was quite different from the other presentations, which was good because I think we do need a wake up call. In particular, I hadn’t realized that military were already playing a kind of play of words to obfuscate the actual use of AI in weapons. So that got me concerned.

“How do we model or even talk about human values or human ethics in a way that we can get computers to follow those human morals? I think this is a hard question, and there are different approaches to it.

“Wendell Wallach had some interesting things to say, but he came at the issue from a different perspective. The way these issues will be dealt with through machine learning approaches and deep learning, at least in my group, is probably going to bring a very different color.”

“True. [The conference] has been very useful for me in the context of doing this grant, and understanding better the community – it’s not a community I really knew before, so it has been very useful.”

“I think it is important to send a message, even if I didn’t agree with all the wordings as they were. Overall, I think they were quite aligned with what I think. I like the idea of having a collective statement because, overall, our group – I don’t think it’s represented by what the media or decision-makers understand of the issues. So I think it is important to send these kinds of messages, and that we have some authority that we should be using.”

“I feel very strongly that I’m going to be much more comfortable with my own technical work if I know that I’m acting as a responsible person, in general, with respect to this work. And that means talking to politicians, talking to the media, thinking about these issues, even if they’re not the usual technical things. We can’t leave it in the hands of just the usual people. I think we need to be part of the discussion. So I feel compelled to participate. … I’m really happy to see all these young people caring about these issues.”

The economic prosperity created by AI should be shared broadly, to benefit all of humanity.

“I’m a very progressive person so I feel very strongly that dignity and justice mean wealth is redistributed. And I’m really concerned about AI worsening the effects and concentration of power and wealth that we’ve seen in the last 30 years. So this is pretty important for me.

“I consider that one of the greatest dangers is that people either deal with AI in an irresponsible way or maliciously – I mean for their personal gain. And by having a more egalitarian society, throughout the world, I think we can reduce those dangers. In a society where there’s a lot of violence, a lot of inequality, the risk of misusing AI or having people use it irresponsibly in general is much greater. Making AI beneficial for all is very central to the safety question.”

Bengio had reservations about the explainability or justifiability of decisions based on AI because he thinks that may not be technically feasible in the way that some people would like. “We have to be careful with that because we may end up barring machine learning from publicly used systems, if we’re not careful.” But he agrees with the underlying principle which is that “we should be careful that the complexity of AI systems doesn’t become a tool for abusing minorities or individuals who don’t have access to understand how it works.

“I think this is a serious social rights issue, but the solution may not be as simple as saying ‘it has to be explainable,’ because it won’t be [explainable].”

“I agree, except ‘assured’ is maybe strong. It may not be possible to be completely aligned. There are a lot of things that are innate, which we won’t be able to get by machine learning, and that may be difficult to get by philosophy or introspection, so it’s not totally clear we’ll be able to perfectly align. I think the wording should be something along the lines of ‘we’ll do our best.’ Otherwise, I totally agree.”

“In the last few years, the vast majority of AI research and machine learning research has been very, very much influenced by the IT industry to build the next gadget, better phone, better search engines, better advertising, etc. This has been useful because we can now recognize images much better and understand languages much better. But I believe it’s high time that – and I see it happening – that researchers in both academia and industry should look at applications of machine learning that are not necessarily going to make a profit, but the main selling point for doing the research is you can have a really positive impact for a lot of people. … I would be delighted if we found applications in other areas like the environment or fighting poverty.”


PUBLICATIONS
Goodfellow, Ian J., Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville (2016). Deep Learning. MIT Press.

Bahdanau, Dzmitry, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio (2015). “Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”. In: ICLR’2015, arXiv:1409.0473.

LeCun, Yann, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton (2015). “Deep Learning”. In: Nature 521.7553, pp. 436–444.

Dauphin, Yann, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua Bengio (2014). “Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex optimization”. In: NIPS’2014, arXiv:1406.2572.

Montufar, Guido F., Razvan Pascanu, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio (2014). “On the Number of Linear Regions of Deep Neural Networks”. In: NIPS’2014, arXiv:1402.1869.

Goodfellow, Ian J., Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio (2014). “Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: NIPS’2014, arXiv:1406.2661.

Pascanu, Razvan, Guido Montufar, and Yoshua Bengio (2014). “On the number of inference regions of deep feed forward networks with piece-wise linear activations”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations 2014 (Conference Track),arXiv:1305.6663.

Yoshua Bengio, Li Yao, Guillaume Alain, and Pascal Vincent (2013). “Generalized Denoising Auto-Encoders as Generative Models”. In: NIPS’2013, arXiv:1305.6663.

Glorot, X., A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio (2011). “Deep Sparse Rectifier Neural Networks”. In: AISTATS’2011

Glorot, Xavier and Yoshua Bengio (2010). “Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks”. In: AISTATS’2010.

Bengio, Yoshua, Jerome Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston (2009). “Curriculum Learning”. In: ICML’09, 2009_curriculum_icml.

Bengio, Yoshua (2009). “Learning deep architectures for AI”. In: Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 2.1, pp. 1–127.

Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol (2008). “Ex-tracting and Composing Robust Features with Denoising Autoencoders”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’08). Ed. by William W. Cohen, Andrew McCallum, and Sam T. Roweis. ACM, pp. 1096–1103.

Bengio, Yoshua, Pascal Lamblin, Dan Popovici, and Hugo Larochelle (2007). “Greedy Layer-Wise Training of Deep Networks”. In: NIPS’2006. Ed. by Bernhard Schölkopf, John Platt, and Thomas Hoffman. MIT Press, pp. 153–160.

Bengio, Y., Delalleau, O., Le Roux, N. (2005) “The Curse of Highly Variable Functions for Local Kernel Machines”. NIPS’2005

Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and Christian Jauvin (2003). “A Neural Probabilistic Language Model”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 3, pp. 1137– 1155.

Bengio, Yoshua and Samy Bengio (2000). “Modeling High-Dimensional Discrete Data with Multi-Layer Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12 (NIPS’99). Ed. by S.A. Solla, T.K. Leen, and K-R. Müller. MIT Press, pp. 400–406.

LeCun, Yann, Leon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner (1998). “Gradient-Based Learning Applied to Document Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11, pp. 2278– 2324.

Bengio, Y., P. Simard, and P. Frasconi (1994). “Learning Long-Term Dependencies with Gradient Descent is Difficult”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 5.2, pp. 157– 166.

Bengio, Yoshua, Samy Bengio, Jocelyn Cloutier, and Jan Gecsei (1991). “Learning a Synaptic Learning Rule”. In: International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). Seattle, WA, II–A969.

